Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Large
Language Models: A Survey
Yunfan Gaoa, Yun Xiongb, Xinyu Gaob, Kangxiang Jiab, Jinliu Panb, Yuxi Bic, Yi Daia, Jiawei Suna, Meng
Wangc, and Haofen Wang a,c
aShanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
bShanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
cCollege of Design and Innovation, Tongji University
Abstract—Large Language Models (LLMs) showcase impres- in Figure 1. The development trajectory of RAG in the era
sive capabilities but encounter challenges like hallucination, of large models exhibits several distinct stage characteristics.
outdated knowledge, and non-transparent, untraceable reasoning
Initially, RAG’s inception coincided with the rise of the
processes. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged
Transformer architecture, focusing on enhancing language
as a promising solution by incorporating knowledge from external
databases. This enhances the accuracy and credibility of the models by incorporating additional knowledge through Pre-
generation, particularly for knowledge-intensive tasks, and allows Training Models (PTM). This early stage was characterized
for continuous knowledge updates and integration of domain- by foundational work aimed at refining pre-training techniques
specific information. RAG synergistically merges LLMs’ intrin-
[3]–[5].The subsequent arrival of ChatGPT [6] marked a
sic knowledge with the vast, dynamic repositories of external
pivotal moment, with LLM demonstrating powerful in context
databases. This comprehensive review paper offers a detailed
examination of the progression of RAG paradigms, encompassing learning (ICL) capabilities. RAG research shifted towards
the Naive RAG, the Advanced RAG, and the Modular RAG. providing better information for LLMs to answer more com-
It meticulously scrutinizes the tripartite foundation of RAG plex and knowledge-intensive tasks during the inference stage,
frameworks, which includes the retrieval, the generation and the
leading to rapid development in RAG studies. As research
augmentation techniques. The paper highlights the state-of-the-
progressed, the enhancement of RAG was no longer limited art technologies embedded in each of these critical components,
providing a profound understanding of the advancements in RAG to the inference stage but began to incorporate more with LLM
systems. Furthermore, this paper introduces up-to-date evalua- fine-tuning techniques.
tion framework and benchmark. At the end, this article delineates The burgeoning field of RAG has experienced swift growth,
the challenges currently faced and points out prospective avenues yet it has not been accompanied by a systematic synthesis that
for research and development 1.
could clarify its broader trajectory. This survey endeavors to
Index Terms—Large language model, retrieval-augmented gen- fill this gap by mapping out the RAG process and charting
eration, natural language processing, information retrieval
its evolution and anticipated future paths, with a focus on the
integration of RAG within LLMs. This paper considers both
technical paradigms and research methods, summarizing three
I. INTRODUCTION
main research paradigms from over 100 RAG studies, and
LARGE language models (LLMs) have achieved remark-
analyzing key technologies in the core stages of “Retrieval,”
able success, though they still face significant limitations,
“Generation,” and “Augmentation.” On the other hand, current
especially in domain-specific or knowledge-intensive tasks [1],
research tends to focus more on methods, lacking analysis and
notably producing “hallucinations” [2] when handling queries
summarization of how to evaluate RAG. This paper compre-
beyond their training data or requiring current information. To
hensively reviews the downstream tasks, datasets, benchmarks,
overcome challenges, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
and evaluation methods applicable to RAG. Overall, this
enhances LLMs by retrieving relevant document chunks from
paper sets out to meticulously compile and categorize the
external knowledge base through semantic similarity calcu-
foundational technical concepts, historical progression, and
lation. By referencing external knowledge, RAG effectively
the spectrum of RAG methodologies and applications that
reduces the problem of generating factually incorrect content.
have emerged post-LLMs. It is designed to equip readers and
Its integration into LLMs has resulted in widespread adoption,
professionals with a detailed and structured understanding of
establishing RAG as a key technology in advancing chatbots
both large models and RAG. It aims to illuminate the evolution
and enhancing the suitability of LLMs for real-world applica-
of retrieval augmentation techniques, assess the strengths and
tions.
weaknesses of various approaches in their respective contexts,
RAG technology has rapidly developed in recent years, and
and speculate on upcoming trends and innovations.
the technology tree summarizing related research is shown
Our contributions are as follows:
• In this survey, we present a thorough and systematic
Corresponding Author.Email:haofen.wang@tongji.edu.cn
review of the state-of-the-art RAG methods, delineating
1Resources are available at https://github.com/Tongji-KGLLM/
RAG-Survey its evolution through paradigms including naive RAG,
raM
]LC.sc[
5v79901.2132:viXra

Fig. 1. Technology tree of RAG research. The stages of involving RAG mainly include pre-training, fine-tuning, and inference. With the emergence of LLMs,
research on RAG initially focused on leveraging the powerful in context learning abilities of LLMs, primarily concentrating on the inference stage. Subsequent
research has delved deeper, gradually integrating more with the fine-tuning of LLMs. Researchers have also been exploring ways to enhance language models
in the pre-training stage through retrieval-augmented techniques.
advanced RAG, and modular RAG. This review contex- faces and its future development directions. At last, the paper
tualizes the broader scope of RAG research within the concludes in Section VIII.
landscape of LLMs.
• We identify and discuss the central technologies integral II. OVERVIEW OF RAG
to the RAG process, specifically focusing on the aspects
A typical application of RAG is illustrated in Figure 2.
of “Retrieval”, “Generation” and “Augmentation”, and
Here, a user poses a question to ChatGPT about a recent,
delve into their synergies, elucidating how these com-
widely discussed news. Given ChatGPT’s reliance on pre-
ponents intricately collaborate to form a cohesive and
training data, it initially lacks the capacity to provide up-
effective RAG framework.
dates on recent developments. RAG bridges this information
• We have summarized the current assessment methods of gap by sourcing and incorporating knowledge from external
RAG, covering 26 tasks, nearly 50 datasets, outlining
databases. In this case, it gathers relevant news articles related
the evaluation objectives and metrics, as well as the
to the user’s query. These articles, combined with the original
current evaluation benchmarks and tools. Additionally,
question, form a comprehensive prompt that empowers LLMs
we anticipate future directions for RAG, emphasizing
to generate a well-informed answer.
potential enhancements to tackle current challenges.
The RAG research paradigm is continuously evolving, and
we categorize it into three stages: Naive RAG, Advanced
The paper unfolds as follows: Section II introduces the
RAG, and Modular RAG, as showed in Figure 3. Despite
main concept and current paradigms of RAG. The following
RAG method are cost-effective and surpass the performance
three sections explore core components—“Retrieval”, “Gen-
of the native LLM, they also exhibit several limitations.
eration” and “Augmentation”, respectively. Section III focuses
The development of Advanced RAG and Modular RAG is
on optimization methods in retrieval,including indexing, query
a response to these specific shortcomings in Naive RAG.
and embedding optimization. Section IV concentrates on post-
retrieval process and LLM fine-tuning in generation. Section V
A. Naive RAG
analyzes the three augmentation processes. Section VI focuses
on RAG’s downstream tasks and evaluation system. Sec- The Naive RAG research paradigm represents the earli-
tion VII mainly discusses the challenges that RAG currently est methodology, which gained prominence shortly after the

Fig. 2. A representative instance of the RAG process applied to question answering. It mainly consists of 3 steps. 1) Indexing. Documents are split into chunks,
encoded into vectors, and stored in a vector database. 2) Retrieval. Retrieve the Top k chunks most relevant to the question based on semantic similarity. 3)
Generation. Input the original question and the retrieved chunks together into LLM to generate the final answer.
widespread adoption of ChatGPT. The Naive RAG follows Retrieval Challenges. The retrieval phase often struggles
a traditional process that includes indexing, retrieval, and with precision and recall, leading to the selection of misaligned
generation, which is also characterized as a “Retrieve-Read” or irrelevant chunks, and the missing of crucial information.
framework [7]. Generation Difficulties. In generating responses, the model
Indexing starts with the cleaning and extraction of raw data may face the issue of hallucination, where it produces con-
in diverse formats like PDF, HTML, Word, and Markdown, tent not supported by the retrieved context. This phase can
which is then converted into a uniform plain text format. To also suffer from irrelevance, toxicity, or bias in the outputs,
accommodate the context limitations of language models, text detracting from the quality and reliability of the responses.
is segmented into smaller, digestible chunks. Chunks are then Augmentation Hurdles. Integrating retrieved information
encoded into vector representations using an embedding model with the different task can be challenging, sometimes resulting
and stored in vector database. This step is crucial for enabling in disjointed or incoherent outputs. The process may also
efficient similarity searches in the subsequent retrieval phase. encounter redundancy when similar information is retrieved
Retrieval. Upon receipt of a user query, the RAG system from multiple sources, leading to repetitive responses. Deter-
employs the same encoding model utilized during the indexing mining the significance and relevance of various passages and
phase to transform the query into a vector representation. ensuring stylistic and tonal consistency add further complexity.
It then computes the similarity scores between the query Facing complex issues, a single retrieval based on the original
vector and the vector of chunks within the indexed corpus. query may not suffice to acquire adequate context information.
The system prioritizes and retrieves the top K chunks that Moreover, there’s a concern that generation models might
demonstrate the greatest similarity to the query. These chunks overly rely on augmented information, leading to outputs that
are subsequently used as the expanded context in prompt. simply echo retrieved content without adding insightful or
synthesized information.
Generation. The posed query and selected documents are
synthesized into a coherent prompt to which a large language
model is tasked with formulating a response. The model’s B. Advanced RAG
approach to answering may vary depending on task-specific Advanced RAG introduces specific improvements to over-
criteria, allowing it to either draw upon its inherent parametric come the limitations of Naive RAG. Focusing on enhancing re-
knowledge or restrict its responses to the information con- trieval quality, it employs pre-retrieval and post-retrieval strate-
tained within the provided documents. In cases of ongoing gies. To tackle the indexing issues, Advanced RAG refines
dialogues, any existing conversational history can be integrated its indexing techniques through the use of a sliding window
into the prompt, enabling the model to engage in multi-turn approach, fine-grained segmentation, and the incorporation of
dialogue interactions effectively. metadata. Additionally, it incorporates several optimization
However, Naive RAG encounters notable drawbacks: methods to streamline the retrieval process [8].

Fig. 3. Comparison between the three paradigms of RAG. (Left) Naive RAG mainly consists of three parts: indexing, retrieval and generation. (Middle)
Advanced RAG proposes multiple optimization strategies around pre-retrieval and post-retrieval, with a process similar to the Naive RAG, still following a
chain-like structure. (Right) Modular RAG inherits and develops from the previous paradigm, showcasing greater flexibility overall. This is evident in the
introduction of multiple specific functional modules and the replacement of existing modules. The overall process is not limited to sequential retrieval and
generation; it includes methods such as iterative and adaptive retrieval.
Pre-retrieval process. In this stage, the primary focus is C. Modular RAG
on optimizing the indexing structure and the original query.
The goal of optimizing indexing is to enhance the quality of The modular RAG architecture advances beyond the for-
the content being indexed. This involves strategies: enhancing mer two RAG paradigms, offering enhanced adaptability and
data granularity, optimizing index structures, adding metadata, versatility. It incorporates diverse strategies for improving its
alignment optimization, and mixed retrieval. While the goal components, such as adding a search module for similarity
of query optimization is to make the user’s original question searches and refining the retriever through fine-tuning. Inno-
clearer and more suitable for the retrieval task. Common vations like restructured RAG modules [13] and rearranged
methods include query rewriting query transformation, query RAG pipelines [14] have been introduced to tackle specific
expansion and other techniques [7], [9]–[11]. challenges. The shift towards a modular RAG approach is
becoming prevalent, supporting both sequential processing and
Post-Retrieval Process. Once relevant context is retrieved,
integrated end-to-end training across its components. Despite
it’s crucial to integrate it effectively with the query. The main
its distinctiveness, Modular RAG builds upon the foundational
methods in post-retrieval process include rerank chunks and
principles of Advanced and Naive RAG, illustrating a progres-
context compressing. Re-ranking the retrieved information to
sion and refinement within the RAG family.
relocate the most relevant content to the edges of the prompt is
1) New Modules: The Modular RAG framework introduces
a key strategy. This concept has been implemented in frame-
works such as LlamaIndex2, LangChain3, and HayStack [12]. additional specialized components to enhance retrieval and
processing capabilities. The Search module adapts to spe-
Feeding all relevant documents directly into LLMs can lead
cific scenarios, enabling direct searches across various data
to information overload, diluting the focus on key details with
sources like search engines, databases, and knowledge graphs,
irrelevant content.To mitigate this, post-retrieval efforts con-
using LLM-generated code and query languages [15]. RAG-
centrate on selecting the essential information, emphasizing
Fusion addresses traditional search limitations by employing
critical sections, and shortening the context to be processed.
a multi-query strategy that expands user queries into diverse
perspectives, utilizing parallel vector searches and intelligent
re-ranking to uncover both explicit and transformative knowl-
2https://www.llamaindex.ai edge [16]. The Memory module leverages the LLM’s memory
3https://www.langchain.com/ to guide retrieval, creating an unbounded memory pool that

aligns the text more closely with data distribution through iter- methods for LLMs, RAG is often compared with Fine-tuning
ative self-enhancement [17], [18]. Routing in the RAG system (FT) and prompt engineering. Each method has distinct charac-
navigates through diverse data sources, selecting the optimal teristics as illustrated in Figure 4. We used a quadrant chart to
pathway for a query, whether it involves summarization, illustrate the differences among three methods in two dimen-
specific database searches, or merging different information sions: external knowledge requirements and model adaption
streams [19]. The Predict module aims to reduce redundancy requirements. Prompt engineering leverages a model’s inherent
and noise by generating context directly through the LLM, capabilities with minimum necessity for external knowledge
ensuring relevance and accuracy [13]. Lastly, the Task Adapter and model adaption. RAG can be likened to providing a model
module tailors RAG to various downstream tasks, automating with a tailored textbook for information retrieval, ideal for pre-
prompt retrieval for zero-shot inputs and creating task-specific cise information retrieval tasks. In contrast, FT is comparable
retrievers through few-shot query generation [20], [21] .This to a student internalizing knowledge over time, suitable for
comprehensive approach not only streamlines the retrieval pro- scenarios requiring replication of specific structures, styles, or
cess but also significantly improves the quality and relevance formats.
of the information retrieved, catering to a wide array of tasks RAG excels in dynamic environments by offering real-
and queries with enhanced precision and flexibility. time knowledge updates and effective utilization of external
2) New Patterns: Modular RAG offers remarkable adapt- knowledge sources with high interpretability. However, it
ability by allowing module substitution or reconfiguration comes with higher latency and ethical considerations regarding
to address specific challenges. This goes beyond the fixed data retrieval. On the other hand, FT is more static, requiring
structures of Naive and Advanced RAG, characterized by a retraining for updates but enabling deep customization of the
simple “Retrieve” and “Read” mechanism. Moreover, Modular model’s behavior and style. It demands significant compu-
RAG expands this flexibility by integrating new modules or tational resources for dataset preparation and training, and
adjusting interaction flow among existing ones, enhancing its while it can reduce hallucinations, it may face challenges with
applicability across different tasks. unfamiliar data.
Innovations such as the Rewrite-Retrieve-Read [7]model In multiple evaluations of their performance on various
leverage the LLM’s capabilities to refine retrieval queries knowledge-intensive tasks across different topics, [28] re-
through a rewriting module and a LM-feedback mechanism vealed that while unsupervised fine-tuning shows some im-
to update rewriting model., improving task performance. provement, RAG consistently outperforms it, for both exist-
Similarly, approaches like Generate-Read [13] replace tradi- ing knowledge encountered during training and entirely new
tional retrieval with LLM-generated content, while Recite- knowledge. Additionally, it was found that LLMs struggle
Read [22] emphasizes retrieval from model weights, enhanc- to learn new factual information through unsupervised fine-
ing the model’s ability to handle knowledge-intensive tasks. tuning. The choice between RAG and FT depends on the
Hybrid retrieval strategies integrate keyword, semantic, and specific needs for data dynamics, customization, and com-
vector searches to cater to diverse queries. Additionally, em- putational capabilities in the application context. RAG and
ploying sub-queries and hypothetical document embeddings FT are not mutually exclusive and can complement each
(HyDE) [11] seeks to improve retrieval relevance by focusing other, enhancing a model’s capabilities at different levels.
on embedding similarities between generated answers and real In some instances, their combined use may lead to optimal
documents. performance. The optimization process involving RAG and FT
Adjustments in module arrangement and interaction, such may require multiple iterations to achieve satisfactory results.
as the Demonstrate-Search-Predict (DSP) [23] framework
and the iterative Retrieve-Read-Retrieve-Read flow of ITER- III. RETRIEVAL
RETGEN [14], showcase the dynamic use of module out-
In the context of RAG, it is crucial to efficiently retrieve
puts to bolster another module’s functionality, illustrating a
relevant documents from the data source. There are several
sophisticated understanding of enhancing module synergy.
key issues involved, such as the retrieval source, retrieval
The flexible orchestration of Modular RAG Flow showcases
granularity, pre-processing of the retrieval, and selection of
the benefits of adaptive retrieval through techniques such as
the corresponding embedding model.
FLARE [24] and Self-RAG [25]. This approach transcends
the fixed RAG retrieval process by evaluating the necessity
of retrieval based on different scenarios. Another benefit of A. Retrieval Source
a flexible architecture is that the RAG system can more RAG relies on external knowledge to enhance LLMs, while
easily integrate with other technologies (such as fine-tuning the type of retrieval source and the granularity of retrieval
or reinforcement learning) [26]. For example, this can involve units both affect the final generation results.
fine-tuning the retriever for better retrieval results, fine-tuning 1) Data Structure: Initially, text is s the mainstream source
the generator for more personalized outputs, or engaging in of retrieval. Subsequently, the retrieval source expanded to in-
collaborative fine-tuning [27]. clude semi-structured data (PDF) and structured data (Knowl-
edge Graph, KG) for enhancement. In addition to retrieving
D. RAG vs Fine-tuning
from original external sources, there is also a growing trend in
The augmentation of LLMs has attracted considerable atten- recent researches towards utilizing content generated by LLMs
tion due to their growing prevalence. Among the optimization themselves for retrieval and enhancement purposes.

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RAG METHODS
Retrieval Retrieval Augmentation Retrieval
Method Retrieval Source
Data Type Granularity Stage process
CoG [29] Wikipedia Text Phrase Pre-training Iterative
DenseX [30] FactoidWiki Text Proposition Inference Once
EAR [31] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
UPRISE [20] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
RAST [32] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
Self-Mem [17] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Iterative
FLARE [24] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Sentence Tuning Adaptive
PGRA [33] Wikipedia Text Sentence Inference Once
FILCO [34] Wikipedia Text Sentence Inference Once
RADA [35] Dataset-base Text Sentence Inference Once
Filter-rerank [36] Synthesized dataset Text Sentence Inference Once
R-GQA [37] Dataset-base Text Sentence Pair Tuning Once
LLM-R [38] Dataset-base Text Sentence Pair Inference Iterative
TIGER [39] Dataset-base Text Item-base Pre-training Once
LM-Indexer [40] Dataset-base Text Item-base Tuning Once
BEQUE [9] Dataset-base Text Item-base Tuning Once
CT-RAG [41] Synthesized dataset Text Item-base Tuning Once
Atlas [42] Wikipedia, Common Crawl Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
RAVEN [43] Wikipedia Text Chunk Pre-training Once
RETRO++ [44] Pre-training Corpus Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
INSTRUCTRETRO [45] Pre-training corpus Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
RRR [7] Search Engine Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-e2e [46] Dataset-base Text Chunk Tuning Once
PROMPTAGATOR [21] BEIR Text Chunk Tuning Once
AAR [47] MSMARCO,Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-DIT [27] Common Crawl,Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RAG-Robust [48] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-Long-Form [49] Dataset-base Text Chunk Tuning Once
CoN [50] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
Self-RAG [25] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Adaptive
BGM [26] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
CoQ [51] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
Token-Elimination [52] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
PaperQA [53] Arxiv,Online Database,PubMed Text Chunk Inference Iterative
NoiseRAG [54] FactoidWiki Text Chunk Inference Once
IAG [55] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
NoMIRACL [56] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
ToC [57] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Recursive
SKR [58] Dataset-base,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Adaptive
ITRG [59] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
RAG-LongContext [60] Dataset-base Text Chunk Inference Once
ITER-RETGEN [14] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
IRCoT [61] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Recursive
LLM-Knowledge-Boundary [62] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
RAPTOR [63] Dataset-base Text Chunk Inference Recursive
RECITE [22] LLMs Text Chunk Inference Once
ICRALM [64] Pile,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
Retrieve-and-Sample [65] Dataset-base Text Doc Tuning Once
Zemi [66] C4 Text Doc Tuning Once
CRAG [67] Arxiv Text Doc Inference Once
1-PAGER [68] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Iterative
PRCA [69] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Once
QLM-Doc-ranking [70] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Once
Recomp [71] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Once
DSP [23] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Iterative
RePLUG [72] Pile Text Doc Inference Once
ARM-RAG [73] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Iterative
GenRead [13] LLMs Text Doc Inference Iterative
UniMS-RAG [74] Dataset-base Text Multi Tuning Once
CREA-ICL [19] Dataset-base Crosslingual,Text Sentence Inference Once
PKG [75] LLM Tabular,Text Chunk Inference Once
SANTA [76] Dataset-base Code,Text Item Pre-training Once
SURGE [77] Freebase KG Sub-Graph Tuning Once
MK-ToD [78] Dataset-base KG Entity Tuning Once
Dual-Feedback-ToD [79] Dataset-base KG Entity Sequence Tuning Once
KnowledGPT [15] Dataset-base KG Triplet Inference Muti-time
FABULA [80] Dataset-base,Graph KG Entity Inference Once
HyKGE [81] CMeKG KG Entity Inference Once
KALMV [82] Wikipedia KG Triplet Inference Iterative
RoG [83] Freebase KG Triplet Inference Iterative
G-Retriever [84] Dataset-base TextGraph Sub-Graph Inference Once

Fig. 4. RAG compared with other model optimization methods in the aspects of “External Knowledge Required” and “Model Adaption Required”. Prompt
Engineering requires low modifications to the model and external knowledge, focusing on harnessing the capabilities of LLMs themselves. Fine-tuning, on
the other hand, involves further training the model. In the early stages of RAG (Naive RAG), there is a low demand for model modifications. As research
progresses, Modular RAG has become more integrated with fine-tuning techniques.
Unstructured Data, such as text, is the most widely used (GNNs), LLMs and RAG, enhancing graph comprehension
retrieval source, which are mainly gathered from corpus. For and question-answering capabilities through soft prompting
open-domain question-answering (ODQA) tasks, the primary of the LLM, and employs the Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree
retrieval sources are Wikipedia Dump with the current major (PCST) optimization problem for targeted graph retrieval. On
versions including HotpotQA 4 (1st October , 2017), DPR5 (20 the contrary, it requires additional effort to build, validate,
December, 2018). In addition to encyclopedic data, common and maintain structured databases. On the contrary, it requires
unstructured data includes cross-lingual text [19] and domain- additional effort to build, validate, and maintain structured
specific data (such as medical [67]and legal domains [29]). databases.
Semi-structured data. typically refers to data that contains a LLMs-Generated Content. Addressing the limitations of
combination of text and table information, such as PDF. Han- external auxiliary information in RAG, some research has
dling semi-structured data poses challenges for conventional focused on exploiting LLMs’ internal knowledge. SKR [58]
RAG systems due to two main reasons. Firstly, text splitting classifies questions as known or unknown, applying retrieval
processes may inadvertently separate tables, leading to data enhancement selectively. GenRead [13] replaces the retriever
corruption during retrieval. Secondly, incorporating tables into with an LLM generator, finding that LLM-generated contexts
the data can complicate semantic similarity searches. When often contain more accurate answers due to better alignment
dealing with semi-structured data, one approach involves lever- with the pre-training objectives of causal language modeling.
aging the code capabilities of LLMs to execute Text-2-SQL Selfmem [17] iteratively creates an unbounded memory pool
queries on tables within databases, such as TableGPT [85]. with a retrieval-enhanced generator, using a memory selec-
Alternatively, tables can be transformed into text format for tor to choose outputs that serve as dual problems to the
further analysis using text-based methods [75]. However, both original question, thus self-enhancing the generative model.
of these methods are not optimal solutions, indicating substan- These methodologies underscore the breadth of innovative
tial research opportunities in this area. data source utilization in RAG, striving to improve model
Structured data, such as knowledge graphs (KGs) [86] , performance and task effectiveness.
which are typically verified and can provide more precise in- 2) Retrieval Granularity: Another important factor besides
formation. KnowledGPT [15] generates KB search queries and the data format of the retrieval source is the granularity of
stores knowledge in a personalized base, enhancing the RAG the retrieved data. Coarse-grained retrieval units theoretically
model’s knowledge richness. In response to the limitations of can provide more relevant information for the problem, but
LLMs in understanding and answering questions about textual they may also contain redundant content, which could distract
graphs, G-Retriever [84] integrates Graph Neural Networks the retriever and language models in downstream tasks [50],
[87]. On the other hand, fine-grained retrieval unit granularity
4https://hotpotqa.github.io/wiki-readme.html increases the burden of retrieval and does not guarantee seman-
5https://github.com/facebookresearch/DPR tic integrity and meeting the required knowledge. Choosing

the appropriate retrieval granularity during inference can be Hierarchical index structure. File are arranged in parent-
a simple and effective strategy to improve the retrieval and child relationships, with chunks linked to them. Data sum-
downstream task performance of dense retrievers. maries are stored at each node, aiding in the swift traversal
In text, retrieval granularity ranges from fine to coarse, of data and assisting the RAG system in determining which
including Token, Phrase, Sentence, Proposition, Chunks, Doc- chunks to extract. This approach can also mitigate the illusion
ument. Among them, DenseX [30]proposed the concept of caused by block extraction issues.
using propositions as retrieval units. Propositions are defined Knowledge Graph index. Utilize KG in constructing the
as atomic expressions in the text, each encapsulating a unique hierarchical structure of documents contributes to maintaining
factual segment and presented in a concise, self-contained nat- consistency. It delineates the connections between different
ural language format. This approach aims to enhance retrieval concepts and entities, markedly reducing the potential for
precision and relevance. On the Knowledge Graph (KG), illusions. Another advantage is the transformation of the
retrieval granularity includes Entity, Triplet, and sub-Graph. information retrieval process into instructions that LLM can
The granularity of retrieval can also be adapted to downstream comprehend, thereby enhancing the accuracy of knowledge
tasks, such as retrieving Item IDs [40]in recommendation tasks retrieval and enabling LLM to generate contextually coherent
and Sentence pairs [38]. Detailed information is illustrated in responses, thus improving the overall efficiency of the RAG
Table I. system. To capture the logical relationship between document
content and structure, KGP [91] proposed a method of building
B. Indexing Optimization an index between multiple documents using KG. This KG
In the Indexing phase, documents will be processed, seg- consists of nodes (representing paragraphs or structures in the
mented, and transformed into Embeddings to be stored in a documents, such as pages and tables) and edges (indicating
vector database. The quality of index construction determines semantic/lexical similarity between paragraphs or relationships
whether the correct context can be obtained in the retrieval within the document structure), effectively addressing knowl-
phase. edge retrieval and reasoning problems in a multi-document
1) Chunking Strategy: The most common method is to split environment.
the document into chunks on a fixed number of tokens (e.g.,
100, 256, 512) [88]. Larger chunks can capture more context,
but they also generate more noise, requiring longer processing C. Query Optimization
time and higher costs. While smaller chunks may not fully
One of the primary challenges with Naive RAG is its
convey the necessary context, they do have less noise. How-
direct reliance on the user’s original query as the basis for
ever, chunks leads to truncation within sentences, prompting
retrieval. Formulating a precise and clear question is difficult,
the optimization of a recursive splits and sliding window meth-
and imprudent queries result in subpar retrieval effectiveness.
ods, enabling layered retrieval by merging globally related
Sometimes, the question itself is complex, and the language
information across multiple retrieval processes [89]. Never-
is not well-organized. Another difficulty lies in language
theless, these approaches still cannot strike a balance between
complexity ambiguity. Language models often struggle when
semantic completeness and context length. Therefore, methods
dealing with specialized vocabulary or ambiguous abbrevi-
like Small2Big have been proposed, where sentences (small)
ations with multiple meanings. For instance, they may not
are used as the retrieval unit, and the preceding and following
discern whether “LLM” refers to large language model or a
sentences are provided as (big) context to LLMs [90].
Master of Laws in a legal context.
2) Metadata Attachments: Chunks can be enriched with
1) Query Expansion: Expanding a single query into mul-
metadata information such as page number, file name, au-
tiple queries enriches the content of the query, providing
thor,category timestamp. Subsequently, retrieval can be filtered
further context to address any lack of specific nuances, thereby
based on this metadata, limiting the scope of the retrieval.
ensuring the optimal relevance of the generated answers.
Assigning different weights to document timestamps during
retrieval can achieve time-aware RAG, ensuring the freshness Multi-Query. By employing prompt engineering to expand
of knowledge and avoiding outdated information. queries via LLMs, these queries can then be executed in
In addition to extracting metadata from the original doc- parallel. The expansion of queries is not random, but rather
uments, metadata can also be artificially constructed. For meticulously designed.
example, adding summaries of paragraph, as well as intro- Sub-Query. The process of sub-question planning represents
ducing hypothetical questions. This method is also known as the generation of the necessary sub-questions to contextualize
Reverse HyDE. Specifically, using LLM to generate questions and fully answer the original question when combined. This
that can be answered by the document, then calculating the process of adding relevant context is, in principle, similar
similarity between the original question and the hypothetical to query expansion. Specifically, a complex question can be
question during retrieval to reduce the semantic gap between decomposed into a series of simpler sub-questions using the
the question and the answer. least-to-most prompting method [92].
3) Structural Index: One effective method for enhancing Chain-of-Verification(CoVe). The expanded queries undergo
information retrieval is to establish a hierarchical structure for validation by LLM to achieve the effect of reducing halluci-
the documents. By constructing In structure, RAG system can nations. Validated expanded queries typically exhibit higher
expedite the retrieval and processing of pertinent data. reliability [93].

2) Query Transformation: The core concept is to retrieve to provide initial search results for training dense retrieval
chunks based on a transformed query instead of the user’s models. Additionally, pre-training language models (PLMs)
original query. can be utilized to learn term weights to enhance sparse
Query Rewrite.The original queries are not always optimal retrieval. Specifically, it also demonstrates that sparse retrieval
for LLM retrieval, especially in real-world scenarios. There- models can enhance the zero-shot retrieval capability of dense
fore, we can prompt LLM to rewrite the queries. In addition to retrieval models and assist dense retrievers in handling queries
using LLM for query rewriting, specialized smaller language containing rare entities, thereby improving robustness.
models, such as RRR (Rewrite-retrieve-read) [7]. The imple- 2) Fine-tuning Embedding Model: In instances where the
mentation of the query rewrite method in the Taobao, known context significantly deviates from pre-training corpus, partic-
as BEQUE [9] has notably enhanced recall effectiveness for ularly within highly specialized disciplines such as healthcare,
long-tail queries, resulting in a rise in GMV. legal practice, and other sectors replete with proprietary jargon,
Another query transformation method is to use prompt fine-tuning the embedding model on your own domain dataset
engineering to let LLM generate a query based on the original becomes essential to mitigate such discrepancies.
query for subsequent retrieval. HyDE [11] construct hypothet- In addition to supplementing domain knowledge, another
ical documents (assumed answers to the original query). It purpose of fine-tuning is to align the retriever and generator,
focuses on embedding similarity from answer to answer rather for example, using the results of LLM as the supervision signal
than seeking embedding similarity for the problem or query. for fine-tuning, known as LSR (LM-supervised Retriever).
Using the Step-back Prompting method [10], the original PROMPTAGATOR [21] utilizes the LLM as a few-shot query
query is abstracted to generate a high-level concept question generator to create task-specific retrievers, addressing chal-
(step-back question). In the RAG system, both the step-back lenges in supervised fine-tuning, particularly in data-scarce
question and the original query are used for retrieval, and both domains. Another approach, LLM-Embedder [97], exploits
the results are utilized as the basis for language model answer LLMs to generate reward signals across multiple downstream
generation. tasks. The retriever is fine-tuned with two types of supervised
3) Query Routing: Based on varying queries, routing to signals: hard labels for the dataset and soft rewards from
distinct RAG pipeline,which is suitable for a versatile RAG the LLMs. This dual-signal approach fosters a more effective
system designed to accommodate diverse scenarios. fine-tuning process, tailoring the embedding model to diverse
Metadata Router/ Filter. The first step involves extracting downstream applications. REPLUG [72] utilizes a retriever
keywords (entity) from the query, followed by filtering based and an LLM to calculate the probability distributions of the
on the keywords and metadata within the chunks to narrow retrieved documents and then performs supervised training
down the search scope. by computing the KL divergence. This straightforward and
Semantic Router is another method of routing involves effective training method enhances the performance of the
leveraging the semantic information of the query. Specific retrieval model by using an LM as the supervisory signal,
apprach see Semantic Router 6. Certainly, a hybrid routing eliminating the need for specific cross-attention mechanisms.
approach can also be employed, combining both semantic and Moreover, inspired by RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from
metadata-based methods for enhanced query routing. Human Feedback), utilizing LM-based feedback to reinforce
the retriever through reinforcement learning.
D. Embedding
In RAG, retrieval is achieved by calculating the similarity E. Adapter
(e.g. cosine similarity) between the embeddings of the ques-
Fine-tuning models may present challenges, such as in-
tion and document chunks, where the semantic representation
tegrating functionality through an API or addressing con-
capability of embedding models plays a key role. This mainly
straints arising from limited local computational resources.
includes a sparse encoder (BM25) and a dense retriever (BERT
Consequently, some approaches opt to incorporate an external
architecture Pre-training language models). Recent research
adapter to aid in alignment.
has introduced prominent embedding models such as AngIE,
To optimize the multi-task capabilities of LLM, UP-
Voyage, BGE,etc [94]–[96], which are benefit from multi-task
RISE [20] trained a lightweight prompt retriever that can
instruct tuning. Hugging Face’s MTEB leaderboard 7 evaluates
automatically retrieve prompts from a pre-built prompt pool
embedding models across 8 tasks, covering 58 datasests. Ad-
that are suitable for a given zero-shot task input. AAR
ditionally, C-MTEB focuses on Chinese capability, covering
(Augmentation-Adapted Retriver) [47] introduces a universal
6 tasks and 35 datasets. There is no one-size-fits-all answer
adapter designed to accommodate multiple downstream tasks.
to “which embedding model to use.” However, some specific
While PRCA [69] add a pluggable reward-driven contextual
models are better suited for particular use cases.
adapter to enhance performance on specific tasks. BGM [26]
1) Mix/hybrid Retrieval : Sparse and dense embedding
keeps the retriever and LLM fixed,and trains a bridge Seq2Seq
approaches capture different relevance features and can ben-
model in between. The bridge model aims to transform the
efit from each other by leveraging complementary relevance
retrieved information into a format that LLMs can work with
information. For instance, sparse retrieval models can be used
effectively, allowing it to not only rerank but also dynami-
6https://github.com/aurelio-labs/semantic-router cally select passages for each query, and potentially employ
7https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard more advanced strategies like repetition. Furthermore, PKG

introduces an innovative method for integrating knowledge In this paradigm, SLMs serve as filters, while LLMs function
into white-box models via directive fine-tuning [75]. In this as reordering agents. The research shows that instructing
approach, the retriever module is directly substituted to gen- LLMs to rearrange challenging samples identified by SLMs
erate relevant documents according to a query. This method leads to significant improvements in various Information
assists in addressing the difficulties encountered during the Extraction (IE) tasks. Another straightforward and effective
fine-tuning process and enhances model performance. approach involves having the LLM evaluate the retrieved
content before generating the final answer. This allows the
IV. GENERATION LLM to filter out documents with poor relevance through LLM
critique. For instance, in Chatlaw [104], the LLM is prompted
After retrieval, it is not a good practice to directly input all
to self-suggestion on the referenced legal provisions to assess
the retrieved information to the LLM for answering questions.
their relevance.
Following will introduce adjustments from two perspectives:
adjusting the retrieved content and adjusting the LLM.
B. LLM Fine-tuning
A. Context Curation Targeted fine-tuning based on the scenario and data char-
acteristics on LLMs can yield better results. This is also one
Redundant information can interfere with the final gener-
of the greatest advantages of using on-premise LLMs. When
ation of LLM, and overly long contexts can also lead LLM
LLMs lack data in a specific domain, additional knowledge can
to the “Lost in the middle” problem [98]. Like humans, LLM
be provided to the LLM through fine-tuning. Huggingface’s
tends to only focus on the beginning and end of long texts,
fine-tuning data can also be used as an initial step.
while forgetting the middle portion. Therefore, in the RAG
Another benefit of fine-tuning is the ability to adjust the
system, we typically need to further process the retrieved
model’s input and output. For example, it can enable LLM to
content.
adapt to specific data formats and generate responses in a par-
1) Reranking: Reranking fundamentally reorders document
ticular style as instructed [37]. For retrieval tasks that engage
chunks to highlight the most pertinent results first, effectively
with structured data, the SANTA framework [76] implements
reducing the overall document pool, severing a dual purpose
a tripartite training regimen to effectively encapsulate both
in information retrieval, acting as both an enhancer and a
structural and semantic nuances. The initial phase focuses on
filter, delivering refined inputs for more precise language
the retriever, where contrastive learning is harnessed to refine
model processing [70]. Reranking can be performed using
the query and document embeddings.
rule-based methods that depend on predefined metrics like
Aligning LLM outputs with human or retriever preferences
Diversity, Relevance, and MRR, or model-based approaches
through reinforcement learning is a potential approach. For
like Encoder-Decoder models from the BERT series (e.g.,
instance, manually annotating the final generated answers
SpanBERT), specialized reranking models such as Cohere
and then providing feedback through reinforcement learning.
rerank or bge-raranker-large, and general large language mod-
In addition to aligning with human preferences, it is also
els like GPT [12], [99].
2) Context Selection/Compression: A common misconcep- possible to align with the preferences of fine-tuned models
and retrievers [79]. When circumstances prevent access to
tion in the RAG process is the belief that retrieving as many
powerful proprietary models or larger parameter open-source
relevant documents as possible and concatenating them to form
models, a simple and effective method is to distill the more
a lengthy retrieval prompt is beneficial. However, excessive
powerful models(e.g. GPT-4). Fine-tuning of LLM can also
context can introduce more noise, diminishing the LLM’s
be coordinated with fine-tuning of the retriever to align pref-
perception of key information .
erences. A typical approach, such as RA-DIT [27], aligns the
(Long) LLMLingua [100], [101] utilize small language
scoring functions between Retriever and Generator using KL
models (SLMs) such as GPT-2 Small or LLaMA-7B, to
divergence.
detect and remove unimportant tokens, transforming it into
a form that is challenging for humans to comprehend but
well understood by LLMs. This approach presents a direct V. AUGMENTATION PROCESS IN RAG
and practical method for prompt compression, eliminating the
In the domain of RAG, the standard practice often involves
need for additional training of LLMs while balancing language
a singular (once) retrieval step followed by generation, which
integrity and compression ratio. PRCA tackled this issue by
can lead to inefficiencies and sometimes is typically insuffi-
training an information extractor [69]. Similarly, RECOMP
cient for complex problems demanding multi-step reasoning,
adopts a comparable approach by training an information
as it provides a limited scope of information [105]. Many
condenser using contrastive learning [71]. Each training data
studies have optimized the retrieval process in response to this
point consists of one positive sample and five negative sam-
issue, and we have summarised them in Figure 5.
ples, and the encoder undergoes training using contrastive loss
throughout this process [102] .
A. Iterative Retrieval
In addition to compressing the context, reducing the num-
ber of documents aslo helps improve the accuracy of the Iterative retrieval is a process where the knowledge base
model’s answers. Ma et al. [103] propose the “Filter-Reranker” is repeatedly searched based on the initial query and the text
paradigm, which combines the strengths of LLMs and SLMs. generated so far, providing a more comprehensive knowledge

Fig. 5. In addition to the most common once retrieval, RAG also includes three types of retrieval augmentation processes. (left) Iterative retrieval involves
alternating between retrieval and generation, allowing for richer and more targeted context from the knowledge base at each step. (Middle) Recursive retrieval
involves gradually refining the user query and breaking down the problem into sub-problems, then continuously solving complex problems through retrieval
and generation. (Right) Adaptive retrieval focuses on enabling the RAG system to autonomously determine whether external knowledge retrieval is necessary
and when to stop retrieval and generation, often utilizing LLM-generated special tokens for control.
base for LLMs. This approach has been shown to enhance retrieval involves a structured index to process and retrieve
the robustness of subsequent answer generation by offering data in a hierarchical manner, which may include summarizing
additional contextual references through multiple retrieval sections of a document or lengthy PDF before performing a
iterations. However, it may be affected by semantic discon- retrieval based on this summary. Subsequently, a secondary
tinuity and the accumulation of irrelevant information. ITER- retrieval within the document refines the search, embodying
RETGEN [14] employs a synergistic approach that lever- the recursive nature of the process. In contrast, multi-hop
ages “retrieval-enhanced generation” alongside “generation- retrieval is designed to delve deeper into graph-structured data
enhanced retrieval” for tasks that necessitate the reproduction sources, extracting interconnected information [106].
of specific information. The model harnesses the content
required to address the input task as a contextual basis for
C. Adaptive Retrieval
retrieving pertinent knowledge, which in turn facilitates the
Adaptive retrieval methods, exemplified by Flare [24] and
generation of improved responses in subsequent iterations.
Self-RAG [25], refine the RAG framework by enabling LLMs
to actively determine the optimal moments and content for
B. Recursive Retrieval
retrieval, thus enhancing the efficiency and relevance of the
Recursive retrieval is often used in information retrieval and information sourced.
NLP to improve the depth and relevance of search results. These methods are part of a broader trend wherein
The process involves iteratively refining search queries based LLMs employ active judgment in their operations, as seen
on the results obtained from previous searches. Recursive in model agents like AutoGPT, Toolformer, and Graph-
Retrieval aims to enhance the search experience by gradu- Toolformer [107]–[109]. Graph-Toolformer, for instance, di-
ally converging on the most pertinent information through a vides its retrieval process into distinct steps where LLMs
feedback loop. IRCoT [61] uses chain-of-thought to guide proactively use retrievers, apply Self-Ask techniques, and em-
the retrieval process and refines the CoT with the obtained ploy few-shot prompts to initiate search queries. This proactive
retrieval results. ToC [57] creates a clarification tree that stance allows LLMs to decide when to search for necessary
systematically optimizes the ambiguous parts in the Query. It information, akin to how an agent utilizes tools.
can be particularly useful in complex search scenarios where WebGPT [110] integrates a reinforcement learning frame-
the user’s needs are not entirely clear from the outset or where work to train the GPT-3 model in autonomously using a
the information sought is highly specialized or nuanced. The search engine during text generation. It navigates this process
recursive nature of the process allows for continuous learning using special tokens that facilitate actions such as search
and adaptation to the user’s requirements, often resulting in engine queries, browsing results, and citing references, thereby
improved satisfaction with the search outcomes. expanding GPT-3’s capabilities through the use of external
To address specific data scenarios, recursive retrieval and search engines. Flare automates timing retrieval by monitoring
multi-hop retrieval techniques are utilized together. Recursive the confidence of the generation process, as indicated by the

probability of generated terms [24]. When the probability falls of search engines, recommendation systems, and information
below a certain threshold would activates the retrieval system retrieval systems are employed to measure the performance of
to collect relevant information, thus optimizing the retrieval the RAG retrieval module. Metrics such as Hit Rate, MRR, and
cycle. Self-RAG [25] introduces “reflection tokens” that allow NDCG are commonly utilized for this purpose [161], [162].
the model to introspect its outputs. These tokens come in Generation Quality. The assessment of generation quality
two varieties: “retrieve” and “critic”. The model autonomously centers on the generator’s capacity to synthesize coherent and
decides when to activate retrieval, or alternatively, a predefined relevant answers from the retrieved context. This evaluation
threshold may trigger the process. During retrieval, the gen- can be categorized based on the content’s objectives: unlabeled
erator conducts a fragment-level beam search across multiple and labeled content. For unlabeled content, the evaluation
paragraphs to derive the most coherent sequence. Critic scores encompasses the faithfulness, relevance, and non-harmfulness
are used to update the subdivision scores, with the flexibility of the generated answers. In contrast, for labeled content,
to adjust these weights during inference, tailoring the model’s the focus is on the accuracy of the information produced by
behavior. Self-RAG’s design obviates the need for additional the model [161]. Additionally, both retrieval and generation
classifiers or reliance on Natural Language Inference (NLI) quality assessments can be conducted through manual or
models, thus streamlining the decision-making process for automatic evaluation methods [29], [161], [163].
when to engage retrieval mechanisms and improving the
model’s autonomous judgment capabilities in generating ac- C. Evaluation Aspects
curate responses. Contemporary evaluation practices of RAG models empha-
size three primary quality scores and four essential abilities,
VI. TASK AND EVALUATION which collectively inform the evaluation of the two principal
targets of the RAG model: retrieval and generation.
The rapid advancement and growing adoption of RAG
1) Quality Scores: Quality scores include context rele-
in the field of NLP have propelled the evaluation of RAG
vance, answer faithfulness, and answer relevance. These qual-
models to the forefront of research in the LLMs community.
ity scores evaluate the efficiency of the RAG model from
The primary objective of this evaluation is to comprehend
different perspectives in the process of information retrieval
and optimize the performance of RAG models across diverse
and generation [164]–[166].
application scenarios.This chapter will mainly introduce the
Context Relevance evaluates the precision and specificity
main downstream tasks of RAG, datasets, and how to evaluate
of the retrieved context, ensuring relevance and minimizing
RAG systems.
processing costs associated with extraneous content.
Answer Faithfulness ensures that the generated answers
A. Downstream Task remain true to the retrieved context, maintaining consistency
The core task of RAG remains Question Answering (QA), and avoiding contradictions.
including traditional single-hop/multi-hop QA, multiple- Answer Relevance requires that the generated answers are
choice, domain-specific QA as well as long-form scenarios directly pertinent to the posed questions, effectively addressing
suitable for RAG. In addition to QA, RAG is continuously the core inquiry.
being expanded into multiple downstream tasks, such as Infor- 2) Required Abilities: RAG evaluation also encompasses
mation Extraction (IE), dialogue generation, code search, etc. four abilities indicative of its adaptability and efficiency:
The main downstream tasks of RAG and their corresponding noise robustness, negative rejection, information integration,
datasets are summarized in Table II. and counterfactual robustness [167], [168]. These abilities are
critical for the model’s performance under various challenges
and complex scenarios, impacting the quality scores.
B. Evaluation Target
Noise Robustness appraises the model’s capability to man-
Historically, RAG models assessments have centered on age noise documents that are question-related but lack sub-
their execution in specific downstream tasks. These evaluations stantive information.
employ established metrics suitable to the tasks at hand. For Negative Rejection assesses the model’s discernment in
instance, question answering evaluations might rely on EM refraining from responding when the retrieved documents do
and F1 scores [7], [45], [59], [72], whereas fact-checking not contain the necessary knowledge to answer a question.
tasks often hinge on Accuracy as the primary metric [4], Information Integration evaluates the model’s proficiency in
[14], [42]. BLEU and ROUGE metrics are also commonly synthesizing information from multiple documents to address
used to evaluate answer quality [26], [32], [52], [78]. Tools complex questions.
like RALLE, designed for the automatic evaluation of RAG Counterfactual Robustness tests the model’s ability to rec-
applications, similarly base their assessments on these task- ognize and disregard known inaccuracies within documents,
specific metrics [160]. Despite this, there is a notable paucity even when instructed about potential misinformation.
of research dedicated to evaluating the distinct characteristics Context relevance and noise robustness are important for
of RAG models.The main evaluation objectives include: evaluating the quality of retrieval, while answer faithfulness,
Retrieval Quality. Evaluating the retrieval quality is crucial answer relevance, negative rejection, information integration,
for determining the effectiveness of the context sourced by and counterfactual robustness are important for evaluating the
the retriever component. Standard metrics from the domains quality of generation.

TABLE II
DOWNSTREAM TASKS AND DATASETS OF RAG
Task Sub Task Dataset Method
[26], [30], [34], [42], [45], [50], [52], [59], [64], [82]
QA Single-hop Natural Qustion(NQ) [111] [3], [4], [22], [27], [40], [43], [54], [62], [71], [112]
[20], [44], [72]
[13], [30], [34], [45], [50], [64]
TriviaQA(TQA) [113] [4], [27], [59], [62], [112]
[22], [25], [43], [44], [71], [72]
SQuAD [114] [20], [23], [30], [32], [45], [69], [112]
Web Questions(WebQ) [115] [3], [4], [13], [30], [50], [68]
PopQA [116] [7], [25], [67]
MS MARCO [117] [4], [40], [52]
[23], [26], [31], [34], [47], [51], [61], [82]
Multi-hop HotpotQA [118]
[7], [14], [22], [27], [59], [62], [69], [71], [91]
2WikiMultiHopQA [119] [14], [24], [48], [59], [61], [91]
MuSiQue [120] [14], [51], [61], [91]
Long-form QA ELI5 [121] [27], [34], [43], [49], [51]
NarrativeQA(NQA) [122] [45], [60], [63], [123]
ASQA [124] [24], [57]
QMSum(QM) [125] [60], [123]
Domain QA Qasper [126] [60], [63]
COVID-QA [127] [35], [46]
CMB [128],MMCU Medical [129] [81]
Multi-Choice QA QuALITY [130] [60], [63]
ARC [131] [25], [67]
CommonsenseQA [132] [58], [66]
Graph QA GraphQA [84] [84]
Dialog Dialog Generation Wizard of Wikipedia (WoW) [133] [13], [27], [34], [42]
Personal Dialog KBP [134] [74], [135]
DuleMon [136] [74]
Task-oriented Dialog CamRest [137] [78], [79]
Recommendation Amazon(Toys,Sport,Beauty) [138] [39], [40]
IE Event Argument Extraction WikiEvent [139] [13], [27], [37], [42]
RAMS [140] [36], [37]
Relation Extraction T-REx [141],ZsRE [142] [27], [51]
Reasoning Commonsense Reasoning HellaSwag [143] [20], [66]
CoT Reasoning CoT Reasoning [144] [27]
Complex Reasoning CSQA [145] [55]
Others Language Understanding MMLU [146] [7], [27], [28], [42], [43], [47], [72]
Language Modeling WikiText-103 [147] [5], [29], [64], [71]
StrategyQA [148] [14], [24], [48], [51], [55], [58]
Fact Checking/Verification FEVER [149] [4], [13], [27], [34], [42], [50]
PubHealth [150] [25], [67]
Text Generation Biography [151] [67]
Text Summarization WikiASP [152] [24]
XSum [153] [17]
Text Classification VioLens [154] [19]
TREC [155] [33]
Sentiment SST-2 [156] [20], [33], [38]
Code Search CodeSearchNet [157] [76]
Robustness Evaluation NoMIRACL [56] [56]
Math GSM8K [158] [73]
Machine Translation JRC-Acquis [159] [17]

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF METRICS APPLICABLE FOR EVALUATION ASPECTS OF RAG
Context Answer Noise Negative Information Counterfactual
Faithfulness
Relevance Relevance Robustness Rejection Integration Robustness
Accuracy ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
EM ✓
Recall ✓
Precision ✓ ✓
R-Rate ✓
Cosine Similarity ✓
Hit Rate ✓
MRR ✓
NDCG ✓
BLEU ✓ ✓ ✓
ROUGE/ROUGE-L ✓ ✓ ✓
The specific metrics for each evaluation aspect are sum- are not constrained by context. In fact, RAG still plays an
marized in Table III. It is essential to recognize that these irreplaceable role. On one hand, providing LLMs with a
metrics, derived from related work, are traditional measures large amount of context at once will significantly impact its
and do not yet represent a mature or standardized approach for inference speed, while chunked retrieval and on-demand input
quantifying RAG evaluation aspects. Custom metrics tailored can significantly improve operational efficiency. On the other
to the nuances of RAG models, though not included here, have hand, RAG-based generation can quickly locate the original
also been developed in some evaluation studies. references for LLMs to help users verify the generated an-
swers. The entire retrieval and reasoning process is observable,
D. Evaluation Benchmarks and Tools while generation solely relying on long context remains a
black box. Conversely, the expansion of context provides new
A series of benchmark tests and tools have been proposed
opportunities for the development of RAG, enabling it to
to facilitate the evaluation of RAG.These instruments furnish
address more complex problems and integrative or summary
quantitative metrics that not only gauge RAG model perfor-
questions that require reading a large amount of material to
mance but also enhance comprehension of the model’s capabil-
answer [49]. Developing new RAG methods in the context of
ities across various evaluation aspects. Prominent benchmarks
super-long contexts is one of the future research trends.
such as RGB, RECALL and CRUD [167]–[169] focus on
appraising the essential abilities of RAG models. Concur-
B. RAG Robustness
rently, state-of-the-art automated tools like RAGAS [164],
ARES [165], and TruLens8 employ LLMs to adjudicate the The presence of noise or contradictory information during
quality scores. These tools and benchmarks collectively form retrieval can detrimentally affect RAG’s output quality. This
a robust framework for the systematic evaluation of RAG situation is figuratively referred to as “Misinformation can
models, as summarized in Table IV. be worse than no information at all”. Improving RAG’s
resistance to such adversarial or counterfactual inputs is gain-
VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS ing research momentum and has become a key performance
metric [48], [50], [82]. Cuconasu et al. [54] analyze which
Despite the considerable progress in RAG technology, sev-
type of documents should be retrieved, evaluate the relevance
eral challenges persist that warrant in-depth research.This
of the documents to the prompt, their position, and the
chapter will mainly introduce the current challenges and future
number included in the context. The research findings reveal
research directions faced by RAG.
that including irrelevant documents can unexpectedly increase
accuracy by over 30%, contradicting the initial assumption
A. RAG vs Long Context
of reduced quality. These results underscore the importance
With the deepening of related research, the context of LLMs of developing specialized strategies to integrate retrieval with
is continuously expanding [170]–[172]. Presently, LLMs can language generation models, highlighting the need for further
effortlessly manage contexts exceeding 200,000 tokens 9. This research and exploration into the robustness of RAG.
capability signifies that long-document question answering,
previously reliant on RAG, can now incorporate the entire C. Hybrid Approaches
document directly into the prompt. This has also sparked
Combining RAG with fine-tuning is emerging as a leading
discussions on whether RAG is still necessary when LLMs
strategy. Determining the optimal integration of RAG and
8https://www.trulens.org/trulens eval/core concepts rag triad/ fine-tuning whether sequential, alternating, or through end-to-
9https://kimi.moonshot.cn end joint training—and how to harness both parameterized

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF EVALUATION FRAMEWORKS
Evaluation Framework Evaluation Targets Evaluation Aspects Quantitative Metrics
Noise Robustness Accuracy
Retrieval Quality Negative Rejection EM
RGB†
Generation Quality Information Integration Accuracy
Counterfactual Robustness Accuracy
RECALL† Generation Quality Counterfactual Robustness R-Rate (Reappearance Rate)
Context Relevance *
Retrieval Quality
RAGAS‡ Faithfulness *
Generation Quality
Answer Relevance Cosine Similarity
Context Relevance Accuracy
Retrieval Quality
ARES‡ Faithfulness Accuracy
Generation Quality
Answer Relevance Accuracy
Context Relevance *
Retrieval Quality
TruLens‡ Faithfulness *
Generation Quality
Answer Relevance *
Creative Generation BLEU
Retrieval Quality Knowledge-intensive QA ROUGE-L
CRUD†
Generation Quality Error Correction BertScore
Summarization RAGQuestEval
† represents a benchmark, and ‡ represents a tool. * denotes customized quantitative metrics, which deviate from traditional
metrics. Readers are encouraged to consult pertinent literature for the specific quantification formulas associated with these
metrics, as required.
and non-parameterized advantages are areas ripe for explo- inadvertent disclosure of document sources or metadata by
ration [27]. Another trend is to introduce SLMs with specific LLMs—are critical engineering challenges that remain to be
functionalities into RAG and fine-tuned by the results of RAG addressed [175].
system. For example, CRAG [67] trains a lightweight retrieval The development of the RAG ecosystem is greatly impacted
evaluator to assess the overall quality of the retrieved docu- by the progression of its technical stack. Key tools like
ments for a query and triggers different knowledge retrieval LangChain and LLamaIndex have quickly gained popularity
actions based on confidence levels. with the emergence of ChatGPT, providing extensive RAG-
related APIs and becoming essential in the realm of LLMs.The
D. Scaling laws of RAG emerging technology stack, while not as rich in features as
LangChain and LLamaIndex, stands out through its specialized
End-to-end RAG models and pre-trained models based
products. For example, Flowise AI prioritizes a low-code
on RAG are still one of the focuses of current re-
approach, allowing users to deploy AI applications, including
searchers [173].The parameters of these models are one of
RAG, through a user-friendly drag-and-drop interface. Other
the key factors.While scaling laws [174] are established for
technologies like HayStack, Meltano, and Cohere Coral are
LLMs, their applicability to RAG remains uncertain. Initial
also gaining attention for their unique contributions to the field.
studies like RETRO++ [44] have begun to address this, yet the
In addition to AI-focused vendors, traditional software and
parameter count in RAG models still lags behind that of LLMs.
cloud service providers are expanding their offerings to include
The possibility of an Inverse Scaling Law 10, where smaller
RAG-centric services. Weaviate’s Verba 11 is designed for
models outperform larger ones, is particularly intriguing and
personal assistant applications, while Amazon’s Kendra 12
merits further investigation.
offers intelligent enterprise search services, enabling users to
browse various content repositories using built-in connectors.
E. Production-Ready RAG
In the development of RAG technology, there is a clear
RAG’s practicality and alignment with engineering require- trend towards different specialization directions, such as: 1)
ments have facilitated its adoption. However, enhancing re- Customization - tailoring RAG to meet specific requirements.
trieval efficiency, improving document recall in large knowl- 2) Simplification - making RAG easier to use to reduce the
edge bases, and ensuring data security—such as preventing
11https://github.com/weaviate/Verba
10https://github.com/inverse-scaling/prize 12https://aws.amazon.com/cn/kendra/

Fig. 6. Summary of RAG ecosystem
initial learning curve. 3) Specialization - optimizing RAG to Vid2Seq augments language models with specialized temporal
better serve production environments. markers, facilitating the prediction of event boundaries and
The mutual growth of RAG models and their technology textual descriptions within a unified output sequence [181].
stacks is evident; technological advancements continuously Code. RBPS [182] excels in small-scale learning tasks by
establish new standards for existing infrastructure. In turn, retrieving code examples that align with developers’ objectives
enhancements to the technology stack drive the development through encoding and frequency analysis. This approach has
of RAG capabilities. RAG toolkits are converging into a demonstrated efficacy in tasks such as test assertion genera-
foundational technology stack, laying the groundwork for tion and program repair. For structured knowledge, the CoK
advanced enterprise applications. However, a fully integrated, method [106] first extracts facts pertinent to the input query
comprehensive platform concept is still in the future, requiring from a knowledge graph, then integrates these facts as hints
further innovation and development. within the input, enhancing performance in knowledge graph
question-answering tasks.
F. Multi-modal RAG
RAG has transcended its initial text-based question-
VIII. CONCLUSION
answering confines, embracing a diverse array of modal data. The summary of this paper, as depicted in Figure 6, empha-
This expansion has spawned innovative multimodal models sizes RAG’s significant advancement in enhancing the capa-
that integrate RAG concepts across various domains: bilities of LLMs by integrating parameterized knowledge from
Image. RA-CM3 [176] stands as a pioneering multimodal language models with extensive non-parameterized data from
model of both retrieving and generating text and images. external knowledge bases. The survey showcases the evolution
BLIP-2 [177] leverages frozen image encoders alongside of RAG technologies and their application on many different
LLMs for efficient visual language pre-training, enabling zero- tasks. The analysis outlines three developmental paradigms
shot image-to-text conversions. The “Visualize Before You within the RAG framework: Naive, Advanced, and Modu-
Write” method [178] employs image generation to steer the lar RAG, each representing a progressive enhancement over
LM’s text generation, showing promise in open-ended text its predecessors. RAG’s technical integration with other AI
generation tasks. methodologies, such as fine-tuning and reinforcement learning,
Audio and Video. The GSS method retrieves and stitches has further expanded its capabilities. Despite the progress in
together audio clips to convert machine-translated data into RAG technology, there are research opportunities to improve
speech-translated data [179]. UEOP marks a significant ad- its robustness and its ability to handle extended contexts.
vancement in end-to-end automatic speech recognition by RAG’s application scope is expanding into multimodal do-
incorporating external, offline strategies for voice-to-text con- mains, adapting its principles to interpret and process diverse
version [180]. Additionally, KNN-based attention fusion lever- data forms like images, videos, and code. This expansion high-
ages audio embeddings and semantically related text embed- lights RAG’s significant practical implications for AI deploy-
dings to refine ASR, thereby accelerating domain adaptation. ment, attracting interest from academic and industrial sectors.

The growing ecosystem of RAG is evidenced by the rise in [19] X. Li, E. Nie, and S. Liang, “From classification to generation:
RAG-centric AI applications and the continuous development Insights into crosslingual retrieval augmented icl,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.06595, 2023.
of supportive tools. As RAG’s application landscape broadens,
[20] D. Cheng, S. Huang, J. Bi, Y. Zhan, J. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Sun,
there is a need to refine evaluation methodologies to keep F. Wei, D. Deng, and Q. Zhang, “Uprise: Universal prompt retrieval
pace with its evolution. Ensuring accurate and representative for improving zero-shot evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08518,
2023.
performance assessments is crucial for fully capturing RAG’s
[21] Z. Dai, V. Y. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Luan, J. Ni, J. Lu, A. Bakalov, K. Guu,
contributions to the AI research and development community. K. B. Hall, and M.-W. Chang, “Promptagator: Few-shot dense retrieval
from 8 examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11755, 2022.
[22] Z. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Tay, Y. Yang, and D. Zhou, “Recitation-augmented
REFERENCES language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01296, 2022.
[23] O. Khattab, K. Santhanam, X. L. Li, D. Hall, P. Liang, C. Potts,
[1] N. Kandpal, H. Deng, A. Roberts, E. Wallace, and C. Raffel, “Large and M. Zaharia, “Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval
language models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge,” in Interna- and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp,” arXiv preprint
tional Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 15696– arXiv:2212.14024, 2022.
15707. [24] Z. Jiang, F. F. Xu, L. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Dwivedi-Yu, Y. Yang,
[2] Y. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Cui, D. Cai, L. Liu, T. Fu, X. Huang, E. Zhao, J. Callan, and G. Neubig, “Active retrieval augmented generation,”
Y.Zhang,Y.Chenetal.,“Siren’ssongintheaiocean: Asurveyonhal- arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06983, 2023.
lucination in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219, [25] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-rag:
2023. Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,”
[3] D. Arora, A. Kini, S. R. Chowdhury, N. Natarajan, G. Sinha, and arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.
A. Sharma, “Gar-meets-rag paradigm for zero-shot information re- [26] Z. Ke, W. Kong, C. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Mei, and M. Bendersky,
trieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20158, 2023. “Bridging the preference gap between retrievers and llms,” arXiv
[4] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, preprint arXiv:2401.06954, 2024.
H. Ku ̈ttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockta ̈schel et al., “Retrieval- [27] X. V. Lin, X. Chen, M. Chen, W. Shi, M. Lomeli, R. James, P. Ro-
augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in driguez, J. Kahn, G. Szilvasy, M. Lewis et al., “Ra-dit: Retrieval-
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. augmented dual instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01352,
[5] S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, J. Hoffmann, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, K. Milli- 2023.
can,G.B.VanDenDriessche,J.-B.Lespiau,B.Damoc,A.Clarketal., [28] O. Ovadia, M. Brief, M. Mishaeli, and O. Elisha, “Fine-tuning or
“Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens,” retrieval? comparing knowledge injection in llms,” arXiv preprint
in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. arXiv:2312.05934, 2023.
2206–2240. [29] T. Lan, D. Cai, Y. Wang, H. Huang, and X.-L. Mao, “Copy is all
[6] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, you need,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al., “Training language Representations, 2022.
models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances in [30] T. Chen, H. Wang, S. Chen, W. Yu, K. Ma, X. Zhao, D. Yu, and
neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 27730–27744, H. Zhang, “Dense x retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we
2022. use?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06648, 2023.
[7] X. Ma, Y. Gong, P. He, H. Zhao, and N. Duan, “Query rewrit- [31] F. Luo and M. Surdeanu, “Divide & conquer for entailment-aware
ing for retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint multi-hop evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02616, 2023.
arXiv:2305.14283, 2023. [32] Q. Gou, Z. Xia, B. Yu, H. Yu, F. Huang, Y. Li, and N. Cam-Tu,
[8] I. ILIN, “Advanced rag techniques: an il- “Diversify question generation with retrieval-augmented style transfer,”
lustrated overview,” https://pub.towardsai.net/ arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14503, 2023.
advanced-rag-techniques-an-illustrated-overview-04d193d8fec6, [33] Z. Guo, S. Cheng, Y. Wang, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “Prompt-guided re-
2023. trievalaugmentationfornon-knowledge-intensivetasks,”arXivpreprint
[9] W. Peng, G. Li, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, D. Ou, X. Zeng, E. Chen et al., arXiv:2305.17653, 2023.
“Large language model based long-tail query rewriting in taobao [34] Z. Wang, J. Araki, Z. Jiang, M. R. Parvez, and G. Neubig, “Learning
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03758, 2023. to filter context for retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
[10] H. S. Zheng, S. Mishra, X. Chen, H.-T. Cheng, E. H. Chi, Q. V. Le, arXiv:2311.08377, 2023.
and D. Zhou, “Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in [35] M. Seo, J. Baek, J. Thorne, and S. J. Hwang, “Retrieval-augmented
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117, 2023. data augmentation for low-resource domain tasks,” arXiv preprint
[11] L. Gao, X. Ma, J. Lin, and J. Callan, “Precise zero-shot dense retrieval arXiv:2402.13482, 2024.
without relevance labels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10496, 2022. [36] Y. Ma, Y. Cao, Y. Hong, and A. Sun, “Large language model is not
[12] V. Blagojevi, “Enhancing rag pipelines in haystack: Introducing diver- a good few-shot information extractor, but a good reranker for hard
sityranker and lostinthemiddleranker,” https://towardsdatascience.com/ samples!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08559, 2023.
enhancing-rag-pipelines-in-haystack-45f14e2bc9f5, 2023. [37] X. Du and H. Ji, “Retrieval-augmented generative question answering
[13] W. Yu, D. Iter, S. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Ju, S. Sanyal, C. Zhu, M. Zeng, for event argument extraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07067, 2022.
and M. Jiang, “Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models [38] L. Wang, N. Yang, and F. Wei, “Learning to retrieve in-context
are strong context generators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10063, 2022. examplesforlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2307.07164,
[14] Z. Shao, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, M. Huang, N. Duan, and W. Chen, 2023.
“Enhancing retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative [39] S. Rajput, N. Mehta, A. Singh, R. H. Keshavan, T. Vu, L. Heldt,
retrieval-generation synergy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15294, 2023. L. Hong, Y. Tay, V. Q. Tran, J. Samost et al., “Recommender systems
[15] X. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Qiu, J. Liang, Q. He, Z. Gu, Y. Xiao, with generative retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05065, 2023.
and W. Wang, “Knowledgpt: Enhancing large language models with [40] B. Jin, H. Zeng, G. Wang, X. Chen, T. Wei, R. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Li,
retrieval and storage access on knowledge bases,” arXiv preprint Y. Li, H. Lu et al., “Language models as semantic indexers,” arXiv
arXiv:2308.11761, 2023. preprint arXiv:2310.07815, 2023.
[16] A. H. Raudaschl, “Forget rag, the future [41] R. Anantha, T. Bethi, D. Vodianik, and S. Chappidi, “Context tuning
is rag-fusion,” https://towardsdatascience.com/ for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05708,
forget-rag-the-future-is-rag-fusion-1147298d8ad1, 2023. 2023.
[17] X. Cheng, D. Luo, X. Chen, L. Liu, D. Zhao, and R. Yan, “Lift [42] G. Izacard, P. Lewis, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, F. Petroni, T. Schick,
yourself up: Retrieval-augmented text generation with self memory,” J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Joulin, S. Riedel, and E. Grave, “Few-shot
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02437, 2023. learning with retrieval augmented language models,” arXiv preprint
[18] S. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, S. Sun, R. Xu, C. Zhu, and arXiv:2208.03299, 2022.
M. Zeng, “Training data is more valuable than you think: A simple [43] J. Huang, W. Ping, P. Xu, M. Shoeybi, K. C.-C. Chang, and B. Catan-
and effective method by retrieving from training data,” arXiv preprint zaro, “Raven: In-context learning with retrieval augmented encoder-
arXiv:2203.08773, 2022. decoder language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07922, 2023.

[44] B. Wang, W. Ping, P. Xu, L. McAfee, Z. Liu, M. Shoeybi, Y. Dong, [66] Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji, “Zemi: Learning
O. Kuchaiev, B. Li, C. Xiao et al., “Shall we pretrain autoregressive zero-shot semi-parametric language models from multiple tasks,” arXiv
language models with retrieval? a comprehensive study,” arXiv preprint preprint arXiv:2210.00185, 2022.
arXiv:2304.06762, 2023. [67] S.-Q. Yan, J.-C. Gu, Y. Zhu, and Z.-H. Ling, “Corrective retrieval
[45] B. Wang, W. Ping, L. McAfee, P. Xu, B. Li, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catan- augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884, 2024.
zaro, “Instructretro: Instruction tuning post retrieval-augmented pre- [68] P. Jain, L. B. Soares, and T. Kwiatkowski, “1-pager: One pass answer
training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07713, 2023. generation and evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16568,
[46] S. Siriwardhana, R. Weerasekera, E. Wen, T. Kaluarachchi, R. Rana, 2023.
and S. Nanayakkara, “Improving the domain adaptation of retrieval [69] H.Yang,Z.Li,Y.Zhang,J.Wang,N.Cheng,M.Li,andJ.Xiao,“Prca:
augmented generation (rag) models for open domain question answer- Fitting black-box large language models for retrieval question answer-
ing,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ing via pluggable reward-driven contextual adapter,” arXiv preprint
vol. 11, pp. 1–17, 2023. arXiv:2310.18347, 2023.
[47] Z. Yu, C. Xiong, S. Yu, and Z. Liu, “Augmentation-adapted retriever
[70] S. Zhuang, B. Liu, B. Koopman, and G. Zuccon, “Open-source large
improves generalization of language models as generic plug-in,” arXiv
language models are strong zero-shot query likelihood models for
preprint arXiv:2305.17331, 2023.
document ranking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13243, 2023.
[48] O. Yoran, T. Wolfson, O. Ram, and J. Berant, “Making retrieval-
[71] F. Xu, W. Shi, and E. Choi, “Recomp: Improving retrieval-augmented
augmented language models robust to irrelevant context,” arXiv
lms with compression and selective augmentation,” arXiv preprint
preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023.
arXiv:2310.04408, 2023.
[49] H.-T. Chen, F. Xu, S. A. Arora, and E. Choi, “Understanding re-
[72] W. Shi, S. Min, M. Yasunaga, M. Seo, R. James, M. Lewis, L. Zettle-
trieval augmentation for long-form question answering,” arXiv preprint
moyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box lan-
arXiv:2310.12150, 2023.
guage models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12652, 2023.
[50] W. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Pan, K. Ma, H. Wang, and D. Yu, “Chain-of-note:
[73] E. Melz, “Enhancing llm intelligence with arm-rag: Auxiliary ra-
Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv
tionale memory for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
preprint arXiv:2311.09210, 2023.
arXiv:2311.04177, 2023.
[51] S. Xu, L. Pang, H. Shen, X. Cheng, and T.-S. Chua, “Search-in-the-
chain: Towards accurate, credible and traceable large language models [74] H. Wang, W. Huang, Y. Deng, R. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Mi,
for knowledgeintensive tasks,” CoRR, vol. abs/2304.14732, 2023. J. Z. Pan, and K.-F. Wong, “Unims-rag: A unified multi-source
[52] M. Berchansky, P. Izsak, A. Caciularu, I. Dagan, and M. Wasserblat, retrieval-augmented generation for personalized dialogue systems,”
“Optimizing retrieval-augmented reader models via token elimination,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13256, 2024.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13682, 2023. [75] Z. Luo, C. Xu, P. Zhao, X. Geng, C. Tao, J. Ma, Q. Lin, and D. Jiang,
[53] J. La ́la, O. O’Donoghue, A. Shtedritski, S. Cox, S. G. Rodriques, “Augmented large language models with parametric knowledge guid-
and A. D. White, “Paperqa: Retrieval-augmented generative agent for ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04757, 2023.
scientific research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07559, 2023. [76] X. Li, Z. Liu, C. Xiong, S. Yu, Y. Gu, Z. Liu, and G. Yu, “Structure-
[54] F. Cuconasu, G. Trappolini, F. Siciliano, S. Filice, C. Campagnano, aware language model pretraining improves dense retrieval on struc-
Y. Maarek, N. Tonellotto, and F. Silvestri, “The power of noise: tured data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19912, 2023.
Redefining retrieval for rag systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14887, [77] M. Kang, J. M. Kwak, J. Baek, and S. J. Hwang, “Knowledge
2024. graph-augmented language models for knowledge-grounded dialogue
[55] Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, S. Shi, M. Han, Y. Wu, R. Lai, and generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18846, 2023.
Z. Cao, “Iag: Induction-augmented generation framework for answer- [78] W. Shen, Y. Gao, C. Huang, F. Wan, X. Quan, and W. Bi, “Retrieval-
ing reasoning questions,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on generation alignment for end-to-end task-oriented dialogue system,”
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023, pp. 1–14. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08877, 2023.
[56] N. Thakur, L. Bonifacio, X. Zhang, O. Ogundepo, E. Kamalloo, [79] T. Shi, L. Li, Z. Lin, T. Yang, X. Quan, and Q. Wang, “Dual-feedback
D. Alfonso-Hermelo, X. Li, Q. Liu, B. Chen, M. Rezagholizadeh et al., knowledge retrieval for task-oriented dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint
“Nomiracl: Knowing when you don’t know for robust multilingual arXiv:2310.14528, 2023.
retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11361, [80] P. Ranade and A. Joshi, “Fabula: Intelligence report generation
2023. using retrieval-augmented narrative construction,” arXiv preprint
[57] G. Kim, S. Kim, B. Jeon, J. Park, and J. Kang, “Tree of clarifica- arXiv:2310.13848, 2023.
tions: Answering ambiguous questions with retrieval-augmented large
[81] X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Xu, R. Qiu, Y. Fang, Z. Wang, J. Tang,
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14696, 2023.
H. Ding, X. Chu, J. Zhao et al., “Think and retrieval: A hypothesis
[58] Y. Wang, P. Li, M. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Self-knowledge guided
knowledge graph enhanced medical large language models,” arXiv
retrieval augmentation for large language models,” arXiv preprint
preprint arXiv:2312.15883, 2023.
arXiv:2310.05002, 2023.
[82] J. Baek, S. Jeong, M. Kang, J. C. Park, and S. J. Hwang,
[59] Z. Feng, X. Feng, D. Zhao, M. Yang, and B. Qin, “Retrieval-
“Knowledge-augmented language model verification,” arXiv preprint
generation synergy augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12836, 2023.
arXiv:2310.05149, 2023.
[83] L. Luo, Y.-F. Li, G. Haffari, and S. Pan, “Reasoning on graphs: Faithful
[60] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian,
and interpretable large language model reasoning,” arXiv preprint
E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long
arXiv:2310.01061, 2023.
context large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025,
[84] X. He, Y. Tian, Y. Sun, N. V. Chawla, T. Laurent, Y. LeCun,
2023.
X. Bresson, and B. Hooi, “G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation
[61] H.Trivedi,N.Balasubramanian,T.Khot,andA.Sabharwal,“Interleav-
fortextualgraphunderstandingandquestionanswering,”arXivpreprint
ing retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive
arXiv:2402.07630, 2024.
multi-step questions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10509, 2022.
[62] R. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Qu, W. X. Zhao, J. Liu, H. Tian, H. Wu, J.- [85] L. Zha, J. Zhou, L. Li, R. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Yang, J. Yuan, C. Su,
R. Wen, and H. Wang, “Investigating the factual knowledge boundary X. Li, A. Su et al., “Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language
of large language models with retrieval augmentation,” arXiv preprint and commands into one gpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08674, 2023.
arXiv:2307.11019, 2023. [86] M. Gaur, K. Gunaratna, V. Srinivasan, and H. Jin, “Iseeq: Information
[63] P. Sarthi, S. Abdullah, A. Tuli, S. Khanna, A. Goldie, and C. D. seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval
Manning, “Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized and knowledge graphs,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18059, 2024. Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp. 10672–10680.
[64] O.Ram,Y.Levine,I.Dalmedigos,D.Muhlgay,A.Shashua,K.Leyton- [87] F. Shi, X. Chen, K. Misra, N. Scales, D. Dohan, E. H. Chi, N. Scha ̈rli,
Brown, and Y. Shoham, “In-context retrieval-augmented language and D. Zhou, “Large language models can be easily distracted by
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00083, 2023. irrelevant context,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
[65] Y. Ren, Y. Cao, P. Guo, F. Fang, W. Ma, and Z. Lin, “Retrieve-and- PMLR, 2023, pp. 31210–31227.
sample: Document-level event argument extraction via hybrid retrieval [88] R. Teja, “Evaluating the ideal chunk size for a rag
augmentation,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the system using llamaindex,” https://www.llamaindex.ai/blog/
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), evaluating-the-ideal-chunk-size-for-a-rag-system-using-llamaindex-6207e5d3fec5,
2023, pp. 293–306. 2023.

[89] Langchain, “Recursively split by character,” https://python.langchain. of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,
com/docs/modules/data connection/document transformers/recursive 2019.
text splitter, 2023. [112] Y.Liu,S.Yavuz,R.Meng,M.Moorthy,S.Joty,C.Xiong,andY.Zhou,
[90] S. Yang, “Advanced rag 01: Small-to- “Exploring the integration strategies of retriever and large language
big retrieval,” https://towardsdatascience.com/ models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12574, 2023.
advanced-rag-01-small-to-big-retrieval-172181b396d4, 2023. [113] M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Triviaqa: A large
[91] Y. Wang, N. Lipka, R. A. Rossi, A. Siu, R. Zhang, and T. Derr, scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
“Knowledge graph prompting for multi-document question answering,” sion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11730, 2023. [114] P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “Squad: 100,000+
[92] D. Zhou, N. Scha ̈rli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schu- questions for machine comprehension of text,” arXiv preprint
urmans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. Le et al., “Least-to-most prompting arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
enables complex reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint [115] J. Berant, A. Chou, R. Frostig, and P. Liang, “Semantic parsing on
arXiv:2205.10625, 2022. freebase from question-answer pairs,” in Proceedings of the 2013
[93] S. Dhuliawala, M. Komeili, J. Xu, R. Raileanu, X. Li, A. Celikyilmaz, conferenceonempiricalmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessing,2013,
and J. Weston, “Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large pp. 1533–1544.
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11495, 2023. [116] A. Mallen, A. Asai, V. Zhong, R. Das, H. Hajishirzi, and D. Khashabi,
[94] X. Li and J. Li, “Angle-optimized text embeddings,” arXiv preprint “When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness and
arXiv:2309.12871, 2023. limitationsofparametricandnon-parametricmemories,”arXivpreprint
[95] VoyageAI, “Voyage’s embedding models,” https://docs.voyageai.com/ arXiv:2212.10511, 2022.
embeddings/, 2023. [117] T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, J. Gao, S. Tiwary, R. Majumder,
[96] BAAI, “Flagembedding,” https://github.com/FlagOpen/ and L. Deng, “Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading com-
FlagEmbedding, 2023. prehension dataset,” 2016.
[97] P. Zhang, S. Xiao, Z. Liu, Z. Dou, and J.-Y. Nie, “Retrieve anything [118] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W. W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdi-
to augment large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07554, nov, and C. D. Manning, “Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explain-
2023. able multi-hop question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600,
[98] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni, 2018.
and P. Liang, “Lost in the middle: How language models use long
[119] X. Ho, A.-K. D. Nguyen, S. Sugawara, and A. Aizawa, “Constructing a
contexts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172, 2023.
multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps,”
[99] Y. Gao, T. Sheng, Y. Xiang, Y. Xiong, H. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Chat- arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060, 2020.
rec: Towards interactive and explainable llms-augmented recommender
[120] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Musique:
system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14524, 2023.
Multihop questions via single-hop question composition,” Transactions
[100] N. Anderson, C. Wilson, and S. D. Richardson, “Lingua: Addressing
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 10, pp. 539–554,
scenariosforliveinterpretationandautomaticdubbing,”inProceedings
2022.
of the 15th Biennial Conference of the Association for Machine
[121] A. Fan, Y. Jernite, E. Perez, D. Grangier, J. Weston, and M. Auli, “Eli5:
Translation in the Americas (Volume 2: Users and Providers Track
Long form question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09190,
and Government Track), J. Campbell, S. Larocca, J. Marciano,
2019.
K. Savenkov, and A. Yanishevsky, Eds. Orlando, USA: Association
[122] T.Kocˇisky`,J.Schwarz,P.Blunsom,C.Dyer,K.M.Hermann,G.Melis,
for Machine Translation in the Americas, Sep. 2022, pp. 202–209.
and E. Grefenstette, “The narrativeqa reading comprehension chal-
[Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022.amta-upg.14
lenge,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
[101] H. Jiang, Q. Wu, X. Luo, D. Li, C.-Y. Lin, Y. Yang, and L. Qiu,
vol. 6, pp. 317–328, 2018.
“Longllmlingua: Accelerating and enhancing llms in long context
[123] K.-H. Lee, X. Chen, H. Furuta, J. Canny, and I. Fischer, “A human-
scenarios via prompt compression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06839,
inspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts,” arXiv
2023.
preprint arXiv:2402.09727, 2024.
[102] V. Karpukhin, B. Og ̆uz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen,
[124] I. Stelmakh, Y. Luan, B. Dhingra, and M.-W. Chang, “Asqa: Factoid
and W.-t. Yih, “Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question
questions meet long-form answers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06092,
answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020.
2022.
[103] Y. Ma, Y. Cao, Y. Hong, and A. Sun, “Large language model is
[125] M. Zhong, D. Yin, T. Yu, A. Zaidi, M. Mutuma, R. Jha, A. H.
not a good few-shot information extractor, but a good reranker for
Awadallah, A. Celikyilmaz, Y. Liu, X. Qiu et al., “Qmsum: A new
hard samples!” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.08559, 2023. [Online]. Available:
benchmark for query-based multi-domain meeting summarization,”
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532405
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05938, 2021.
[104] J. Cui, Z. Li, Y. Yan, B. Chen, and L. Yuan, “Chatlaw: Open-source
[126] P. Dasigi, K. Lo, I. Beltagy, A. Cohan, N. A. Smith, and M. Gardner,
legal large language model with integrated external knowledge bases,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16092, 2023. “A dataset of information-seeking questions and answers anchored in
research papers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03011, 2021.
[105] O. Yoran, T. Wolfson, O. Ram, and J. Berant, “Making retrieval-
augmented language models robust to irrelevant context,” arXiv [127] T. Mo ̈ller, A. Reina, R. Jayakumar, and M. Pietsch, “Covid-qa: A
preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023. question answering dataset for covid-19,” in ACL 2020 Workshop on
[106] X. Li, R. Zhao, Y. K. Chia, B. Ding, L. Bing, S. Joty, and S. Poria, Natural Language Processing for COVID-19 (NLP-COVID), 2020.
“Chain of knowledge: A framework for grounding large language mod- [128] X. Wang, G. H. Chen, D. Song, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Xiao, F. Jiang,
elswithstructuredknowledgebases,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.13269, J. Li, X. Wan, B. Wang et al., “Cmb: A comprehensive medical
2023. benchmark in chinese,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08833, 2023.
[107] H. Yang, S. Yue, and Y. He, “Auto-gpt for online decision [129] H. Zeng, “Measuring massive multitask chinese understanding,” arXiv
making: Benchmarks and additional opinions,” arXiv preprint preprint arXiv:2304.12986, 2023.
arXiv:2306.02224, 2023. [130] R. Y. Pang, A. Parrish, N. Joshi, N. Nangia, J. Phang, A. Chen, V. Pad-
[108] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess`ı, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettle- makumar, J. Ma, J. Thompson, H. He et al., “Quality: Question an-
moyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models swering with long input texts, yes!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08608,
can teach themselves to use tools,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2021.
2023. [131] P. Clark, I. Cowhey, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, C. Schoenick,
[109] J. Zhang, “Graph-toolformer: To empower llms with graph rea- and O. Tafjord, “Think you have solved question answering? try arc,
soning ability via prompt augmented by chatgpt,” arXiv preprint the ai2 reasoning challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
arXiv:2304.11116, 2023. [132] A. Talmor, J. Herzig, N. Lourie, and J. Berant, “Commonsenseqa:
[110] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, A question answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge,”
C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saunders et al., “Webgpt: Browser- arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00937, 2018.
assisted question-answering with human feedback,” arXiv preprint [133] E. Dinan, S. Roller, K. Shuster, A. Fan, M. Auli, and J. Weston,
arXiv:2112.09332, 2021. “Wizard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational agents,”
[111] T. Kwiatkowski, J. Palomaki, O. Redfield, M. Collins, A. Parikh, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01241, 2018.
C. Alberti, D. Epstein, I. Polosukhin, J. Devlin, K. Lee et al., “Natural [134] H. Wang, M. Hu, Y. Deng, R. Wang, F. Mi, W. Wang, Y. Wang, W.-
questions: a benchmark for question answering research,” Transactions C. Kwan, I. King, and K.-F. Wong, “Large language models as source

plannerforpersonalizedknowledge-groundeddialogue,”arXivpreprint [157] H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,
arXiv:2310.08840, 2023. “Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code
[135] ——, “Large language models as source planner for personal- search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.
ized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08840, [158] K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser,
2023. M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers
[136] X. Xu, Z. Gou, W. Wu, Z.-Y. Niu, H. Wu, H. Wang, and S. Wang, to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
“Long time no see! open-domain conversation with long-term persona [159] R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, A. Widiger, C. Ignat, T. Erjavec, D. Tufis,
memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05797, 2022. and D. Varga, “The jrc-acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus
[137] T.-H. Wen, M. Gasic, N. Mrksic, L. M. Rojas-Barahona, P.-H. with 20+ languages,” arXiv preprint cs/0609058, 2006.
Su, S. Ultes, D. Vandyke, and S. Young, “Conditional generation [160] Y. Hoshi, D. Miyashita, Y. Ng, K. Tatsuno, Y. Morioka, O. Torii,
and snapshot learning in neural dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint and J. Deguchi, “Ralle: A framework for developing and eval-
arXiv:1606.03352, 2016. uating retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
[138] R. He and J. McAuley, “Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution arXiv:2308.10633, 2023.
of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering,” in proceedings [161] J. Liu, “Building production-ready rag applications,” https://www.ai.
of the 25th international conference on world wide web, 2016, pp. engineer/summit/schedule/building-production-ready-rag-applications,
507–517. 2023.
[139] S. Li, H. Ji, and J. Han, “Document-level event argument extraction [162] I. Nguyen, “Evaluating rag part i: How to evaluate document retrieval,”
by conditional generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05919, 2021. https://www.deepset.ai/blog/rag-evaluation-retrieval, 2023.
[140] S. Ebner, P. Xia, R. Culkin, K. Rawlins, and B. Van Durme, “Multi- [163] Q. Leng, K. Uhlenhuth, and A. Polyzotis, “Best practices for
sentence argument linking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03766, 2019. llm evaluation of rag applications,” https://www.databricks.com/blog/
[141] H. Elsahar, P. Vougiouklis, A. Remaci, C. Gravier, J. Hare, F. Laforest, LLM-auto-eval-best-practices-RAG, 2023.
and E. Simperl, “T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural language [164] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “Ragas: Au-
with knowledge base triples,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Inter- tomated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC arXiv:2309.15217, 2023.
2018), 2018.
[165] J. Saad-Falcon, O. Khattab, C. Potts, and M. Zaharia, “Ares: An
[142] O. Levy, M. Seo, E. Choi, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Zero-shot relation ex-
automated evaluation framework for retrieval-augmented generation
traction via reading comprehension,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04115, systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09476, 2023.
2017.
[166] C. Jarvis and J. Allard, “A survey of techniques for
[143] R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi, “Hel-
maximizing llm performance,” https://community.openai.
laswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?” arXiv preprint
com/t/openai-dev-day-2023-breakout-sessions/505213#
arXiv:1905.07830, 2019.
a-survey-of-techniques-for-maximizing-llm-performance-2, 2023.
[144] S. Kim, S. J. Joo, D. Kim, J. Jang, S. Ye, J. Shin, and M. Seo,
[167] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large lan-
“The cot collection: Improving zero-shot and few-shot learning of
guage models in retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
language models via chain-of-thought fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.01431, 2023.
arXiv:2305.14045, 2023.
[168] Y. Liu, L. Huang, S. Li, S. Chen, H. Zhou, F. Meng, J. Zhou, and
[145] A. Saha, V. Pahuja, M. Khapra, K. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Chandar,
X. Sun, “Recall: A benchmark for llms robustness against external
“Complex sequential question answering: Towards learning to converse
counterfactual knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08147, 2023.
overlinkedquestionanswerpairswithaknowledgegraph,”inProceed-
[169] Y. Lyu, Z. Li, S. Niu, F. Xiong, B. Tang, W. Wang, H. Wu, H. Liu,
ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1,
T. Xu, and E. Chen, “Crud-rag: A comprehensive chinese benchmark
2018.
for retrieval-augmented generation of large language models,” arXiv
[146] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and
preprint arXiv:2401.17043, 2024.
J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,”
[170] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long
[147] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel
context large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025,
mixture models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
2023.
[148] M. Geva, D. Khashabi, E. Segal, T. Khot, D. Roth, and J. Berant,
[171] C. Packer, V. Fang, S. G. Patil, K. Lin, S. Wooders, and J. E. Gon-
“Did aristotle use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with
zalez, “Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems,” arXiv preprint
implicit reasoning strategies,” Transactions of the Association for
arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Computational Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 346–361, 2021.
[172] G. Xiao, Y. Tian, B. Chen, S. Han, and M. Lewis, “Efficient
[149] J. Thorne, A. Vlachos, C. Christodoulopoulos, and A. Mittal, “Fever: a
large-scale dataset for fact extraction and verification,” arXiv preprint streaming language models with attention sinks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05355, 2018. arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
[150] N. Kotonya and F. Toni, “Explainable automated fact-checking for [173] T. Zhang, S. G. Patil, N. Jain, S. Shen, M. Zaharia, I. Stoica, and J. E.
public health claims,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09926, 2020. Gonzalez, “Raft: Adapting language model to domain specific rag,”
[151] R. Lebret, D. Grangier, and M. Auli, “Neural text generation from arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10131, 2024.
structured data with application to the biography domain,” arXiv [174] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess,
preprint arXiv:1603.07771, 2016. R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws
[152] H. Hayashi, P. Budania, P. Wang, C. Ackerson, R. Neervannan, for neural language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
and G. Neubig, “Wikiasp: A dataset for multi-domain aspect-based [175] U. Alon, F. Xu, J. He, S. Sengupta, D. Roth, and G. Neubig, “Neuro-
summarization,” Transactions of the Association for Computational symbolic language modeling with automaton-augmented retrieval,” in
Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 211–225, 2021. International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp.
[153] S. Narayan, S. B. Cohen, and M. Lapata, “Don’t give me the details, 468–485.
just the summary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for ex- [176] M. Yasunaga, A. Aghajanyan, W. Shi, R. James, J. Leskovec, P. Liang,
treme summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08745, 2018. M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Retrieval-augmented multi-
[154] S.Saha,J.A.Junaed,M.Saleki,A.S.Sharma,M.R.Rifat,M.Rahouti, modal language modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12561, 2022.
S. I. Ahmed, N. Mohammed, and M. R. Amin, “Vio-lens: A novel [177] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
dataset of annotated social network posts leading to different forms image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language
of communal violence and its evaluation,” in Proceedings of the First models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.
Workshop on Bangla Language Processing (BLP-2023), 2023, pp. 72– [178] W. Zhu, A. Yan, Y. Lu, W. Xu, X. E. Wang, M. Eckstein, and W. Y.
84. Wang, “Visualize before you write: Imagination-guided open-ended
[155] X. Li and D. Roth, “Learning question classifiers,” in COLING 2002: text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03765, 2022.
The19thInternationalConferenceonComputationalLinguistics,2002. [179] J. Zhao, G. Haffar, and E. Shareghi, “Generating synthetic speech from
[156] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y. Ng, spokenvocab for speech translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08174,
and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality 2022.
over a sentiment treebank,” in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on [180] D.M.Chan,S.Ghosh,A.Rastrow,andB.Hoffmeister,“Usingexternal
empirical methods in natural language processing, 2013, pp. 1631– off-policy speech-to-text mappings in contextual end-to-end automated
1642. speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02736, 2023.

[181] A. Yang, A. Nagrani, P. H. Seo, A. Miech, J. Pont-Tuset, I. Laptev,
J. Sivic, and C. Schmid, “Vid2seq: Large-scale pretraining of a visual
language model for dense video captioning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2023, pp. 10714–10726.
[182] N. Nashid, M. Sintaha, and A. Mesbah, “Retrieval-based prompt
selection for code-related few-shot learning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2023, pp.
2450–2462.