Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All
rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026.
CHAPTER
11 Information Retrieval and
Retrieval-Augmented Generation
On two occasions I have been asked,—“Pray, Mr. Babbage, if you put into
the machine wrong figures, will the right answers come out?” ... I am not able
rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas that could provoke such a
question. Babbage (1864)
People need to know things. So pretty much as soon as there were computers
we were asking them questions. By 1961 there was a system to answer questions
about American baseball statistics like “How many games did the Yankees play
in July?” (Green et al., 1961). Even fictional computers in the 1970s like Deep
Thought, invented by Douglas Adams in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy,
answered “the Ultimate Question Of Life, The Universe, and Everything”.1 And
because so much knowledge is encoded in text, systems were answering questions
at human-level performance even before LLMs: IBM’s Watson system won the TV
game-show Jeopardy! in 2011, surpassing humans at answering questions like:
WILLIAM WILKINSON’S “AN ACCOUNT OF THE
PRINCIPALITIES OF WALLACHIA AND MOLDOVIA”
INSPIRED THIS AUTHOR’S MOST FAMOUS NOVEL 2
It follows naturally, then, that an important function of large language models is
to fill human information needs. And since a lot of information is online, finding
the information that fills our needs is closely related to web information retrieval,
the task performed by search engines. Indeed, the distinction is becoming ever more
fuzzy, as modern search engines are integrated with large language models.
factoid Consider some simple information needs, for example factoid questions that
questions
can be met with facts expressed in short texts like the following:
(11.1) Where is the Louvre Museum located?
(11.2) Where does the energy in a nuclear explosion come from?
(11.3) How to get a script l in latex?
To get an LLM to answer these questions, we can just prompt it! For example a
pretrained LLM that has been instruction-tuned on answering questions (instruction-
tuning is in Chapter 10) could directly answer the following question
Where is the Louvre Museum located?
by performing conditional generation given this prefix, and take the response as the
answer. This works because large language models have processed a lot of facts in
their pretraining data, including the location of the Louvre, and have encoded this
information in their parameters. Factual knowledge of this type seems to be stored
in the connections in the very large feedforward layers of transformer models (Geva
et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022).
1 Theanswerwas42,butunfortunatelythequestionwasneverrevealed.
2 Theanswer,ofcourse,is‘WhoisBramStoker’,andthenovelwasDracula.

2 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
Simply prompting an LLM is useful for many generation tasks, including those
involving facts. But the fact that knowledge is stored in the feedforward weights of
the LLM leads to a number of problems with prompting as a method for correctly
generating factual texts or answers.
The first and main problem is that LLMs are often incorrect when generating
hallucinate answers or other texts about facts! Large language models hallucinate. A hallu-
cination is a response that is not faithful to the facts of the world. That is, when
asked questions, large language models sometimes make up answers that sound rea-
sonable. For example, Dahl et al. (2024) found that when asked questions about the
legal domain (like about particular legal cases), large language models hallucinated
from 69% to 88% of the time! LLMs sometimes give incorrect factual responses
even when the correct facts are stored in the parameters; this seems to be caused
by the feedforward layers failing to recall the knowledge stored in their parameters
(Jiang et al., 2024).
And it’s not always possible to tell when language models are hallucinating,
calibrated partly because LLMs aren’t well-calibrated. In a calibrated system, the confidence
of a system in the correctness of its answer is highly correlated with the probability
of an answer being correct. So if a calibrated system is wrong, at least it might hedge
its answer or tell us to go check another source. But since language models are not
well-calibrated, they often give a very wrong answer with complete certainty (Zhou
et al., 2024).
A second problem with meeting user information needs with simple prompting
methods is that prompting a large language model to answer from its pretrained pa-
rameters doesn’t allow us to ask questions about proprietary data. We would like to
use language models to help with user information needs about proprietary data like
personal email. Or for the healthcare application we might want to apply a language
model to medical records. Or a company may have internal documents that contain
answers for customer service or internal use. Or legal firms need to ask questions
about legal discovery from proprietary documents. None of this data (hopefully)
was in the large web-based corpora that large language models are pretrained on.
A final issue with using large language models to answer knowledge questions is
that they are static; they were pretrained once, at a particular time. This means that
LLMs cannot talk about about rapidly changing information (like something that
happened last week) since they won’t have up-to-date information from after their
release data.
One solution to all these problems with simple prompting for generating fac-
tual text is to give a language model external sources of knowledge, for example
proprietary texts like medical or legal records, personal emails, or corporate docu-
ments, and to use those documents in answering questions. This method is called
RAG retrieval-augmented generation or RAG, and that is the method we will focus on
information in this chapter. In RAG we use information retrieval (IR) techniques to retrieve
retrieval
documents that are likely to have information that might help answer the question.
Then we use a large language model to generate an answer given these documents.
Basing our answers on retrieved documents can solve some of the problems with
using simple prompting to answer questions. First, it helps ensure that the answer is
grounded in facts from some curated dataset. And the system can give the user the
answer accompanied by the context of the passage or document it came from. This
information can help users have confidence in the accuracy of the answer (or help
them spot when it is wrong!). And these retrieval techniques can be used on any
proprietary data we want, such as legal or medical data for those applications.

11.1 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 3
We’ll begin by introducing information retrieval, the task of choosing the most
relevant document from a document set given a user’s query expressing their infor-
mation need. We’ll see the classic method based on cosines of sparse tf-idf vec-
tors, modern neural ‘dense’ retrievers based on instead representing queries and
documents neurally with BERT or other language models. We then introduce the
retrieval-augmented generation paradigm.
Finally, we’ll discuss various datasets with questions and answers that can be
used for finetuning LLMs in instruction tuning and for use as benchmarks for eval-
uation.
11.1 Information Retrieval
information Information retrieval or IR is the name of the field encompassing the retrieval of
retrieval
IR all manner of media based on user information needs. The resulting IR system is
often called a search engine. Our goal in this section is to give a sufficient overview
of IR to see its application to large language models meeting user information needs.
Readers with more interest specifically in information retrieval should see the His-
torical Notes section at the end of the chapter.
adhocretrieval The IR task we consider is called ad hoc retrieval, in which a user poses a
query to a retrieval system, which then returns an ordered set of documents from
document some collection. A document refers to whatever unit of text the system indexes
and retrieves (web pages, scientific papers, news articles, or even shorter passages
collection like paragraphs). A collection refers to a set of documents being used to satisfy
user requests. A collection can mean the entire web, in which case we are doing
websearch web search. But a collection can also be a smaller corporate repo, or even a set of
term documents used by one person. term refers to a word in a collection, but it may also
query include phrases. Finally, a query represents a user’s information need expressed as
a set of terms.
Document
Document Document
DocumenDtocument Processing
Index
Search
DocumeDntocument & Indexing
Document Document Document
Maximize: Do D c o u c m u e m n e t nt
document collection Document Do D c o u c m Ru e ma n e t nnkt ed
Documents
Relevance
Score
Query Query
query
Processing Vector
Figure 11.1 The architecture of an ad hoc IR system. Document ranking is based on computing a score for
eachcandidatedocumentgiventhequery,expressinghowrelevantitislikelytobetomeettheusersinformation
need. There are two classes of IR systems, based on the two classes of vectors that are used to represent queries
and documents: sparse vectors and dense vectors. These two kinds of retrieval differ in the details of the
indexing and scoring mechanisms.
The high-level architecture of an ad hoc retrieval engine is shown in Fig. 11.1.
This figure abstracts over the two classes of IR systems, which are based on the
two classes of vectors that are used to represent queries and documents: sparse
vectors and dense vectors. In sparse retrieval, we represent documents and queries
with count vectors, weighted by tf-idf or BM25. In dense retrieval, we represent

4 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
documents and queries with embeddings, computed from language models (either
encoder or decoder models). We’ll discuss sparse retrieval in the rest of this section,
and turn to dense retrieval in Section 11.3.
11.1.1 Representing documents as vectors
vectorspace In the vector space model of information retrieval (Salton, 1971) a document is
model
represented as a vector of counts of the words it contains.
We sometimes call this kind of model a bag-of-words model. Fig. 11.2 shows
bagofwords the intuition: we are representing a text document as if it were a bag of words,
that is, an unordered set of words with their position ignored, keeping only their
frequency in the document. In the example in the figure, instead of representing the
word order in all the phrases like “It manages to be whimsical and romantic”, we
simply note that the word it occurred 5 times in the entire excerpt, the words love,
recommend, and movie once, and so on.
adventure 1
and 3
fairy 1
I love this movie! It's sweet,
fairy it genre 1
but with satirical humor. The always loveto
it great 1
dialogue is great and the whimsical it I
adventure scenes are fun... and seen are anyone have 1
It manages to be whimsical frien h d appy dialogue humor 1
recommend I 5
and romantic while laughing adventure
at the conventions of the who sweet of m sa o t v ir ie ical it i s t atirical 6 1
f r a e i c ry o m ta m le e g n e d n i r t e to . I j u w s o t u a ld b out sev i e t ra I l but to y r e o t mantic I seen 2
anyone. I've seen it several again it the humor sweet 1
the seen would the 4
times, and I'm always happy to scenes I the manages times 1
to see it again whenever I the
have a friend who hasn't fun I and times and to 3
seen it yet! whenever about while whimsical 1
have would 1
conventions
with yet 1
... ...
Figure 11.2 Intuition of the classic vector space model applied to a single document. The position of the
words is ignored (the bag-of-words assumption) and we make use of the frequency of each word.
We could thus imagine representing the document in Fig. 11.2 as the vector [1 3
1 1 1 1 1 5 6 1 2 1 4 1 3 1 1 1] (if we limited ourselves to these 18 dimensions and
ignored all the other words in English).
More generally, we can represent a set of documents as a term-document ma-
term-document trix in which each row represents a word in the vocabulary and each column rep-
matrix
resents a document from some collection of documents. Fig. 11.3 shows a small
selection from a term-document matrix showing the occurrence of four words in
four plays by Shakespeare. Each cell in this matrix represents the number of times a
particular word (defined by the row) occurs in a particular document (defined by the
column). Thus fool appeared 58 times in Twelfth Night.
A document is represented as a count vector, a column in Fig. 11.4. In the
example in Fig. 11.4, we’ve chosen to make the document vectors of dimension 4,
just so they fit on the page; in real term-document matrices, the document vectors
would have dimensionality |V|, the vocabulary size. The first dimension for both
these vectors corresponds to the number of times the word battle occurs, and we can

11.1 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 5
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V
battle 1 0 7 13
good 114 80 62 89
fool 36 58 1 4
wit 20 15 2 3
Figure 11.3 The term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays. Each
cell contains the number of times the (row) word occurs in the (column) document.
compare each dimension, noting for example that the vectors for As You Like It and
Twelfth Night have similar values (1 and 0, respectively) for the first dimension.
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V
battle 1 0 7 13
good 114 80 62 89
fool 36 58 1 4
wit 20 15 2 3
Figure 11.4 The term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays. The red
boxes show that each document is represented as a column vector of length four.
Since 4-dimensional spaces are hard to visualize, Fig. 11.5 shows a visualiza-
tion of the four document vectors in two dimensions; we’ve arbitrarily chosen the
dimensions corresponding to the words battle and fool.
Henry V [4,13]
10 Julius Caesar [1,7]
5 As You Like It [36,1]
5 10 15 20 25 30
elttab
Twelfth Night [58,0]
35 40 45 50 55 60
fool
Figure 11.5 A spatial visualization of the document vectors for the four Shakespeare play
documents, showing just two of the dimensions, corresponding to the words battle and fool.
Thecomedieshavehighvaluesforthefooldimensionandlowvaluesforthebattledimension.
Two documents that are similar will tend to have similar words, and if two doc-
uments have similar words their column vectors will tend to be similar. The vectors
for the comedies As You Like It [1,114,36,20] and Twelfth Night [0,80,58,15] look a
lot more like each other (more fools and wit than battles) than they look like Julius
Caesar [7,62,1,2] or Henry V [13,89,4,3].
11.1.2 Term weighting: tf-idf and BM25
In fact, in IR, we don’t use raw word counts like [1 114 36 20] for As You Like It,
or [1 3 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 1 2 1 4 1 3 1 1 1] for the document in Fig. 11.2. Instead we
termweight compute a term weight for each document word. Two term weighting schemes are
BM25 common: tf-idf and a variant of tf-idf called BM25.
Tf-idf (the ‘-’ here is a hyphen, not a minus sign) is the product of two terms, the
term frequency tf and the inverse document frequency idf.

6 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
The term frequency term tells us how frequent the word is; words that occur
more often in a document are likely to be informative about the document’s contents.
We usually use the log of the word frequency, rather than the raw count. The
intuition is that a word appearing 100 times in a document doesn’t make that word
100 times more likely to be relevant to the meaning of the document. We also need
to do something special with counts of 0, since we can’t take the log of 0.3 So if we
define count(t,d) as the raw count of term t in document d, then tf , the tf of term t
t,d
in document d is
(cid:40)
1+log count(t,d) if count(t,d) > 0
tf t,d = 10 (11.4)
0 otherwise
If we use log weighting, terms which occur 0 times in a document would have tf=0,
1 times in a document tf = 1+log (1) = 1+0 = 1, 10 times in a document tf =
1+log (10) = 2, 100 times tf = 1+log (100) = 3, 1000 times tf = 4, and so on.
10 10
The document frequency df of a term t is the number of documents it oc-
curs in. Terms that occur in only a few documents are useful for discriminating
those documents from the rest of the collection; terms that occur across the entire
collection aren’t as helpful. The inverse document frequency or idf term weight
(Sparck Jones, 1972) is defined as:
idf t = log 10 df (11.5)
where N is the total number of documents in the collection, and df is the number
of documents in which term t occurs. The fewer documents in which a term occurs,
the higher this weight; the lowest weight of 0 is assigned to terms that occur in every
document.
Here are some idf values for some words in the corpus of Shakespeare plays,
ranging from extremely informative words that occur in only one play like Romeo,
to those that occur in a few like salad or Falstaff, to those that are very common like
fool or so common as to be completely non-discriminative since they occur in all 37
plays like good or sweet.4
Word df idf
Romeo 1 1.57
salad 2 1.27
Falstaff 4 0.967
forest 12 0.489
battle 21 0.246
wit 34 0.037
fool 36 0.012
good 37 0
sweet 37 0
The tf-idf value for word t in document d is then the product of term frequency
tf and IDF:
t,d
tf-idf(t,d) = tf t,d ·idf t (11.6)
3 We can also use this alternative formulation, which we have used in earlier editions: tft,d =
log (count(t,d)+1)
4 Sweet was one of Shakespeare’s favorite adjectives, a fact probably related to the increased use of
sugarinEuropeanrecipesaroundtheturnofthe16thcentury(Jurafsky,2014,p. 175).

11.1 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 7
11.1.3 Document Scoring
Once we have represented each document and query as a weighted vector, we need
to score each document. Our goal is to measure the relevance of the document to the
user’s information need, as expressed in their query. In the classic tf-idf model we
estimate this relevance of a document by measuring its geometric similarity in vector
space to the query. That is, we make the simplifying assumption that documents that
have similar words to the query are more relevant to the user.
We use the cosine similarity function introduced in Chapter 5, scoring document
d by the cosine of its vector d with the query vector q:
q·d
score(q,d) = cos(q,d) = (11.7)
|q||d|
Another way to think of the cosine computation is as the dot product of unit vec-
tors; we can first normalize both the query and document vector to unit vectors, by
dividing by their lengths, and then take the dot product:
q d
score(q,d) = cos(q,d) = · (11.8)
|q| |d|
We can spell out Eq. 11.8, using the tf-idf values and spelling out the dot product
as a sum of products:
(cid:88) tf-idf(t,q) tf-idf(t,d)
score(q,d) = (cid:113) · (cid:113) (11.9)
t∈q (cid:80) qi∈q tf-idf2(q i ,q) (cid:80) di∈d tf-idf2(d i ,d)
Now let’s use Eq. 11.9 to walk through an example of a tiny query against a
collection of 4 nano documents, computing tf-idf values and seeing the rank of the
documents. We’ll assume all words in the following query and documents are down-
cased and punctuation is removed:
Query: sweet love
Doc 1: Sweet sweet nurse! Love?
Doc 2: Sweet sorrow
Doc 3: How sweet is love?
Doc 4: Nurse!
Fig. 11.6 shows the computation of the tf-idf cosine between the query and Doc-
ument 1, and the query and Document 2. The cosine is the normalized dot product
of tf-idf values, so for the normalization we must need to compute the document
vector lengths |q|, |d |, and |d | for the query and the first two documents using
1 2
Eq. 11.4, Eq. 11.5, Eq. 11.6, and Eq. 11.9 (computations for Documents 3 and 4 are
also needed but are left as an exercise for the reader). The dot product between the
vectors is the sum over dimensions of the product, for each dimension, of the values
of the two tf-idf vectors for that dimension. This product is only non-zero where
both the query and document have non-zero values, so for this example, in which
only sweet and love have non-zero values in the query, the dot product will be the
sum of the products of those elements of each vector.
Document 1 has a higher cosine with the query (0.747) than Document 2 has
with the query (0.0779), and so the tf-idf cosine model would rank Document 1
above Document 2. This ranking is intuitive given the vector space model, since
Document 1 has both terms including two instances of sweet, while Document 2 is

8 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
Query
word cnt tf df idf tf-idf n’lized = tf-idf/|q|
sweet 1 1 3 0.125 0.125 0.383
nurse 0 0 2 0.301 0 0
love 1 1 2 0.301 0.301 0.924
how 0 0 1 0.602 0 0
sorrow 0 0 1 0.602 0 0
is 0 0 1 0.602 0 0
|q| = .1252+.3012 = .326
Document 1 Document 2
word cnt tf tf-idf n’lized × q cnt tf tf-idf n’lized ×q
sweet 2 1.301 0.163 0.357 0.137 1 1.000 0.125 0.203 0.0779
nurse 1 1.000 0.301 0.661 0 0 0 0 0 0
love 1 1.000 0.301 0.661 0.610 0 0 0 0 0
how 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
sorrow 0 0 0 0 0 1 1.000 0.602 0.979 0
is 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
√ √
|d | = .1632+.3012+.3012 = .456 |d | = .1252+.6022 = .615
1 2
(cid:80) (cid:80)
Cosine: of column: 0.747 Cosine: of column: 0.0779
Figure 11.6 Computation of tf-idf cosine score between the query and nano-documents 1 (0.747) and 2
(0.0779), using Eq. 11.4, Eq. 11.5, Eq. 11.6 and Eq. 11.9.
missing one of the terms. We leave the computation for Documents 3 and 4 as an
exercise for the reader.
In practice, there are many variants and approximations to Eq. 11.9. For exam-
ple, we might choose to simplify processing by removing some terms. To see this,
let’s start by expanding the formula for tf-idf in Eq. 11.9 to explicitly mention the tf
and idf terms from Eq. 11.6:
(cid:88) tf t,q ·idf t tf t,d ·idf t
score(q,d) = (cid:113) · (cid:113) (11.10)
t∈q (cid:80) qi∈q tf-idf2(q i ,q) (cid:80) di∈d tf-idf2(d i ,d)
In one common variant of tf-idf cosine, for example, we drop the idf term for the
document. Eliminating the second copy of the idf term (since the identical term is
already computed for the query) turns out to sometimes result in better performance:
(cid:88) tf t,q ·idf t tf t,d ·idf t
score(q,d) = (cid:113) · (cid:113) (11.11)
t∈q (cid:80) qi∈q tf-idf2(q i ,q) (cid:80) di∈d tf-idf2(d i ,d)
Other variants of tf-idf eliminate various other terms.
BM25 A slightly more complex variant in the tf-idf family is the BM25 weighting
scheme (sometimes called Okapi BM25 after the Okapi IR system in which it was
introduced (Robertson et al., 1995)). BM25 adds two parameters: k, a knob that
adjusts the balance between term frequency and IDF, and b, which controls the im-
portance of document length normalization. The BM25 score of a document d given

11.1 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 9
a query q is:
IDF weightedtf
(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)
(cid:88) (cid:18) N (cid:19) tf t,d
log (cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17) (11.12)
t∈q df t k 1−b+b |d | a d v | g| +tf t,d
where |d | is the length of the average document. When k is 0, BM25 reverts to
avg
no use of term frequency, just a binary selection of terms in the query (plus idf).
A large k results in raw term frequency (plus idf). b ranges from 1 (scaling by
document length) to 0 (no length scaling). Manning et al. (2008) suggest reasonable
values are k = [1.2,2] and b = 0.75. Kamphuis et al. (2020) is a useful summary of
the many minor variants of BM25.
Stop words In the past it was common to remove high-frequency words from both
the query and document before representing them. The list of such high-frequency
stoplist words to be removed is called a stop list. The intuition is that high-frequency terms
(often function words like the, a, to) carry little semantic weight and may not help
with retrieval, and can also help shrink the inverted index files we describe below.
The downside of using a stop list is that it makes it difficult to search for phrases
that contain words in the stop list. For example, common stop lists would reduce the
phrase to be or not to be to the phrase not. In modern IR systems, the use of stop lists
is much less common, partly due to improved efficiency and partly because much
of their function is already handled by IDF weighting, which downweights function
words that occur in every document. Nonetheless, stop word removal is occasionally
useful in various NLP tasks so is worth keeping in mind.
11.1.4 Efficiently finding documents: the Inverted Index
In order to compute scores, we need to efficiently find documents that contain words
in the query. (Any document that contains none of the query terms will have a score
of0andcanbeignored.) ThebasicsearchprobleminIRisthustofindalldocuments
d ∈C that contain a term q ∈ Q.
invertedindex The data structure for this task is the inverted index, which we use for mak-
ing this search efficient, and also conveniently storing useful information like the
document frequency and the count of each term in each document.
An inverted index, given a query term, gives a list of documents that contain the
postings term. It consists of two parts, a dictionary and the postings. The dictionary is a list
of terms (designed to be efficiently accessed), each pointing to a postings list for the
term. A postings list is the list of document IDs associated with each term, which
can also contain information like the term frequency or even the exact positions of
terms in the document. The dictionary can also store the document frequency for
each term. For example, a simple inverted index for our 4 sample documents above,
with each word containing its document frequency in {}, and a pointer to a postings
list that contains document IDs and term counts in [], might look like the following:
how {1} → 3 [1]
is {1} → 3 [1]
love {2} → 1 [1] → 3 [1]
nurse {2} → 1 [1] → 4 [1]
sorrow {1} → 2 [1]
sweet {3} → 1 [2] → 2 [1] → 3 [1]

10 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
Given a list of terms in query, we can very efficiently get lists of all candidate
documents, together with the information necessary to compute the tf-idf scores we
need.
11.2 Evaluation of Information-Retrieval Systems
We measure the performance of ranked retrieval systems using the same precision
and recall metrics we have been using. We make the assumption that each docu-
ment returned by the IR system is either relevant to our purposes or not relevant.
Precision is the fraction of the returned documents that are relevant, and recall is the
fraction of all relevant documents that are returned. More formally, let’s assume a
system returns T ranked documents in response to an information request, a subset
R of these are relevant, a disjoint subset, N, are the remaining irrelevant documents,
and U documents in the collection as a whole are relevant to this request. Precision
and recall are then defined as:
|R| |R|
Precision = Recall = (11.13)
|T| |U|
Unfortunately, these metrics don’t adequately measure the performance of a system
that ranks the documents it returns. If we are comparing the performance of two
ranked retrieval systems, we need a metric that prefers the one that ranks the relevant
documents higher. We need to adapt precision and recall to capture how well a
system does at putting relevant documents higher in the ranking.
Let’s turn to an example. Assume the table in Fig. 11.7 gives rank-specific pre-
cision and recall values calculated as we proceed down through a set of ranked doc-
uments for a particular query; the precisions are the fraction of relevant documents
seen at a given rank, and recalls the fraction of relevant documents found at the same
rank. The recall measures in this example are based on this query having 9 relevant
documents in the collection as a whole.
Note that recall is non-decreasing; when a relevant document is encountered,
recall increases, and when a non-relevant document is found it remains unchanged.
Precision, on the other hand, jumps up and down, increasing when relevant doc-
uments are found, and decreasing otherwise. The most common way to visualize
precision-recall precision and recall is to plot precision against recall in a precision-recall curve,
curve
like the one shown in Fig. 11.8 for the data in table 11.7.
Fig. 11.8 shows the values for a single query. But we’ll need to combine values
for all the queries, and in a way that lets us compare one system to another. One way
of doing this is to plot averaged precision values at 11 fixed levels of recall (0 to 100,
in steps of 10). Since we’re not likely to have datapoints at these exact levels, we
interpolated use interpolated precision values for the 11 recall values from the data points we do
precision
have. We can accomplish this by choosing the maximum precision value achieved
at any level of recall at or above the one we’re calculating. In other words,
IntPrecision(r) = maxPrecision(i) (11.14)
i>=r
This interpolation scheme not only lets us average performance over a set of queries,
but also helps smooth over the irregular precision values in the original data. It is
designed to give systems the benefit of the doubt by assigning the maximum preci-
sion value achieved at higher levels of recall from the one being measured. Fig. 11.9
and Fig. 11.10 show the resulting interpolated data points from our example.

11.2 • EVALUATION OF INFORMATION-RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS 11
Rank Judgment Precision Recall
Rank Rank
1 R 1.0 .11
2 N .50 .11
3 R .66 .22
4 N .50 .22
5 R .60 .33
6 R .66 .44
7 N .57 .44
8 R .63 .55
9 N .55 .55
10 N .50 .55
11 R .55 .66
12 N .50 .66
13 N .46 .66
14 N .43 .66
15 R .47 .77
16 N .44 .77
17 N .41 .77
18 R .44 .88
19 N .42 .88
20 N .40 .88
21 N .38 .88
22 N .36 .88
23 N .35 .88
24 N .33 .88
25 R .36 1.0
Figure 11.7 Rank-specific precision and recall values calculated as we proceed down
through a set of ranked documents (assuming the collection has 9 relevant documents).
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Recall
noisicerP
Figure 11.8 The precision recall curve for the data in table 11.7.
Given curves such as that in Fig. 11.10 we can compare two systems or ap-
proaches by comparing their curves. Clearly, curves that are higher in precision
across all recall values are preferred. However, these curves can also provide insight
into the overall behavior of a system. Systems that are higher in precision toward
the left may favor precision over recall, while systems that are more geared towards
recall will be higher at higher levels of recall (to the right).
meanaverage A second way to evaluate ranked retrieval is mean average precision (MAP),
precision

12 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
Interpolated Precision Recall
1.0 0.0
1.0 .10
.66 .20
.66 .30
.66 .40
.63 .50
.55 .60
.47 .70
.44 .80
.36 .90
.36 1.0
Figure 11.9 Interpolated data points from Fig. 11.7.
Interpolated Precision Recall Curve
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Recall
noisicerP
Figure 11.10 An 11 point interpolated precision-recall curve. Precision at each of the 11
standard recall levels is interpolated for each query from the maximum at any higher level of
recall. The original measured precision recall points are also shown.
which provides a single metric that can be used to compare competing systems or
approaches. In this approach, we again descend through the ranked list of items,
but now we note the precision only at those points where a relevant item has been
encountered (for example at ranks 1, 3, 5, 6 but not 2 or 4 in Fig. 11.7). For a single
query, we average these individual precision measurements over the return set (up
to some fixed cutoff). More formally, if we assume that R is the set of relevant
documents at or above r, then the average precision (AP) for a single query is
1 (cid:88)
AP = Precision r (d) (11.15)
|R |
d∈Rr
where Precision (d) is the precision measured at the rank at which document d was
found. For an ensemble of queries Q, we then average over these averages, to get
our final MAP measure:
1 (cid:88)
MAP = AP(q) (11.16)
|Q|
q∈Q
The MAP for the single query (hence = AP) in Fig. 11.7 is 0.6.

11.3 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL WITH DENSE VECTORS 13
11.3 Information Retrieval with Dense Vectors
The classic tf-idf or BM25 algorithms for IR have long been known to have a con-
ceptual flaw: they work only if there is exact overlap of words between the query
and document. In other words, the user posing a query (or asking a question) needs
to guess exactly what words the writer of the answer might have used, an issue called
the vocabulary mismatch problem (Furnas et al., 1987).
The solution to this problem is to use an approach that can handle synonymy:
instead of (sparse) word-count vectors, using (dense) embeddings. This idea was
first proposed for retrieval in the last century under the name of Latent Semantic
Indexing approach (Deerwester et al., 1990), but is implemented in modern times
via encoders like BERT.
The most powerful approach is to present both the query and the document to a
single encoder, allowing the transformer self-attention to see all the tokens of both
the query and the document, and thus building a representation that is sensitive to
the meanings of both query and document. Then a linear layer can be put on top of
the [CLS] token to predict a similarity score for the query/document tuple:
z = BERT(q;[SEP];d)[CLS]
score(q,d) = softmax(U(z)) (11.17)
This architecture is shown in Fig. 11.11a. Usually the retrieval step is not done on
an entire document. Instead documents are broken up into smaller passages, such
as non-overlapping fixed-length chunks of say 100 tokens, and the retriever encodes
and retrieves these passages rather than entire documents. The query and document
have to be made to fit in the BERT 512-token window, for example by truncating
the query to 64 tokens and truncating the document if necessary so that it, the query,
[CLS], and [SEP] fit in 512 tokens. The BERT system together with the linear layer
U can then be fine-tuned for the relevance task by gathering a tuning dataset of
relevant and non-relevant passages.
The problem with the full BERT architecture in Fig. 11.11a is the expense in
computation and time. With this architecture, every time we get a query, we have to
pass every single document in our entire collection through a BERT encoder jointly
with the new query! This enormous use of resources is impractical for real cases.
At the other end of the computational spectrum is a much more efficient archi-
tecture, the bi-encoder. In this architecture we can encode the documents in the
collection only one time by using two separate encoder models, one to encode the
query and one to encode the document. We encode each document, and store all
the encoded document vectors in advance. When a query comes in, we encode just
this query and then use the dot product between the query vector and the precom-
puted document vectors as the score for each candidate document (Fig. 11.11b). For
example, if we used BERT, we would have two encoders BERT and BERT and
Q D
we could represent the query and document as the [CLS] token of the respective
encoders (Karpukhin et al., 2020):
z = BERT (q)[CLS]
q Q
z = BERT (d)[CLS]
d D
score(q,d) = z q ·z d (11.18)
The bi-encoder is much cheaper than a full query/document encoder, but is also
less accurate, since its relevance decision can’t take full advantage of all the possi-

14 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
s(q,d)
s(q,d)
z CLS z CLS_Q z CLS_D
... ...
... ...
... ...
... ...
... ...
... ...
Query [sep] Document Query Document
(a) (b)
Figure 11.11 Two ways to do dense retrieval, illustrated by using lines between layers to schematically rep-
resent self-attention: (a) Use a single encoder to jointly encode query and document and finetune to produce a
relevancescorewithalinearlayerovertheCLStoken. Thisistoocompute-expensivetouseexceptinrescoring
(b) Use separate encoders for query and document, and use the dot product between CLS token outputs for the
query and document as the score. This is less compute-expensive, but not as accurate.
ble meaning interactions between all the tokens in the query and the tokens in the
document.
There are numerous approaches that lie in between the full encoder and the bi-
encoder. One intermediate alternative is to use cheaper methods (like BM25) as the
first pass relevance ranking for each document, take the top N ranked documents,
and use expensive methods like the full BERT scoring to rerank only the top N
documents rather than the whole set.
ColBERT Another intermediate approach is the ColBERT approach of Khattab and Za-
haria (2020) and Khattab et al. (2021), shown in Fig. 11.12. This method separately
encodes the query and document, but rather than encoding the entire query or doc-
ument into one vector, it separately encodes each of them into contextual represen-
tations for each token. These BERT representations of each document word can be
pre-stored for efficiency. The relevance score between a query q and a document d is
a sum of maximum similarity (MaxSim) operators between tokens in q and tokens
in d. Essentially, for each token in q, ColBERT finds the most contextually simi-
lar token in d, and then sums up these similarities. A relevant document will have
tokens that are contextually very similar to the query.
More formally, a question q is tokenized as [q ,...,q ], prepended with a [CLS]
1 n
and a special [Q] token, truncated to N=32 tokens (or padded with [MASK] tokens if
it is shorter), and passed through BERT to get output vectors q = [q ,...,q ]. The
1 N
passage d with tokens [d ,...,d ], is processed similarly, including a [CLS] and
1 m
special [D] token. A linear layer is applied on top of d and q to control the output
dimension, so as to keep the vectors small for storage efficiency, and vectors are
rescaled to unit length, producing the final vector sequences E (length N) and E
q d
(length m). The ColBERT scoring mechanism is:
(cid:88) m
score(q,d) = m
j=
xE qi ·E dj (11.19)
i=1
While the interaction mechanism has no tunable parameters, the ColBERT ar-

11.3 • INFORMATION RETRIEVAL WITH DENSE VECTORS 15
s(q,d)
MaxSim MaxSim MaxSim
norm norm norm norm norm norm
...
...
...
...
...
...
Query Document
Figure 11.12 A sketch of the ColBERT algorithm at inference time. The query and doc-
ument are first passed through separate BERT encoders. Similarity between query and doc-
ument is computed by summing a soft alignment between the contextual representations of
tokens in the query and the document. Training is end-to-end. (Various details aren’t de-
picted; for example the query is prepended by a [CLS] and [Q:] tokens, and the document
by [CLS] and [D:] tokens). Figure adapted from Khattab and Zaharia (2020).
chitecture still needs to be trained end-to-end to fine-tune the BERT encoders and
train the linear layers (and the special [Q] and [D] embeddings) from scratch. It is
trained on triples (cid:104)q,d+,d−(cid:105) of query q, positive document d+ and negative docu-
ment d− to produce a score for each document using Eq. 11.19, optimizing model
parameters using a cross-entropy loss.
All the supervised algorithms (like ColBERT or the full-interaction version of
the BERT algorithm applied for reranking) need training data in the form of queries
together with relevant and irrelevant passages or documents (positive and negative
examples). There are various semi-supervised ways to get labels; some datasets
(like MS MARCO Ranking, Section 11.5) contain gold positive examples. Negative
examples can be sampled randomly from the top-1000 results from some existing
IR system. If datasets don’t have labeled positive examples, iterative methods like
relevance-guided supervision can be used (Khattab et al., 2021) which rely on the
fact that many datasets contain short answer strings. In this method, an existing IR
system is used to harvest examples that do contain short answer strings (the top few
are taken as positives) or don’t contain short answer strings (the top few are taken as
negatives), these are used to train a new retriever, and then the process is iterated.
Efficiency is an important issue, since every possible document must be ranked
for its similarity to the query. For sparse word-count vectors, the inverted index
allows this very efficiently. For dense vector algorithms finding the set of dense
document vectors that have the highest dot product with a dense query vector is
an instance of the problem of nearest neighbor search. Modern systems there-
Faiss fore make use of approximate nearest neighbor vector search algorithms like Faiss
(Johnson et al., 2017).

16 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
11.4 Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
The information retrieval techniques we introduced in the prior section can be inte-
grated into language models via a method called retrieval-augmented generation
or RAG. In the basic RAG scenario that we will describe in this section, we use IR
techniques to retrieve documents from some specified store of documents that are
likely to have useful information. Then we use a large language model to generate
an answer conditioned on these documents in addition to the original query.
As we summarized in the introduction to the chapter, there are many goals of
retrieval-augmented generation. RAG can help mitigate hallucination, by giving
the model a set of trusted documents. RAG can also help language models gen-
erate factual text about proprietary data, like personal email, or health records, or
company-internal documents, or other legal documents. RAG can also help with
the problem that knowledge is dynamic and time-sensitive, for example if we know
the user’s information need references data from a time after a language model was
trained.
A RAG system is based on two major components: the retriever and the gener-
ator, (the latter is sometimes called, for historical reasons, the reader (Chen et al.,
2017)). Fig. 11.13 sketches out this standard model for answering questions.
User prompt:
Retriever Generator
When was
the premiere of
The Magic Flute? Prompt LLM 1791, according
formulation
to this page
Indexed Docs
Relevant Knowledge
Corpus of Docs Citation
Documents
Figure 11.13 Retrieval-augmented generation takes as input a user prompt (which may express an informa-
tion need like this question example), and a corpus of documents that may be useful in meeting the information
need. Themethodhastwostages: retrieval, whichreturnsrelevantdocumentsfromthecollection, andgenera-
tion,inwhichanLLMgeneratestextgiventhedocumentsasaprompt. Somegenerationsincludeaknowledge
citation that can help the user decide whether to trust the generation, or follow up if they are interested.
retrieval-
augmented In the first stage of the retrieval-augmented generation, or RAG model shown
generation
RAG in Fig. 11.13 we retrieve relevant passages from some prespecified text collection,
for example using the dense retrievers of the previous section. In the second gen-
erate stage, we take the set of retrieved passages, integrate it with the user prompt,
and pass some version of these to a large language model to generate an answer
conditioned on these two things.
ForexampleimaginetheuserasksthequestionWhat year was the premiere
of The Magic Flute?. We pass this question to a dense retriever and return a se-
ries of passages about The Magic Flute.
The idea of retrieval-augmented generation is to condition on the retrieved pas-
sages, jointly with some prompt text, for example like “Based on these texts, answer
this question:”. Thus given a document collection D and a user query q, the most
basic RAG algorithm is:
1. Call a retriever to return R(q) = d ···d , the top-k relevant passages from D
1 k

11.4 • RETRIEVAL-AUGMENTED GENERATION (RAG) 17
2. Create a prompt that includes q and the retrieved passages
3. Call an LLM with the prompt
The resulting prompts might look something like:
Schematic of a RAG Prompt
retrieved passage 1
retrieved passage 2
...
retrieved passage k
Based on these texts, answer this question: What year
was the premiere of The Magic Flute?
The task for the language model is then to generate text according to this proba-
bility model:
(cid:89)
p(x ,...,x ) = p(x |R(q) ; Answer the following question... ; q ;x )
1 n i <i
i=1
There are many augmentations of this basic RAG paradigm. One addition is
the use of agent-based RAG. In the RAG paradigm described so far, a search is
always run and then retrieved passages are combined with the user’s question in a
prompt. But in actual applications, we may not want to run retrieval for every user
turn. Or we may want to retrieve from different collections for different user needs
(sometimes the web, other times a private collection). In agent-based RAG, the
system decides when to call a retrieval agent and for which collection.
Another research area has to do with the relationship between the retriever and
the generator. For example there may be noise in the retrieved passages; some of
them may be irrelevant or wrong, or in an unhelpful order. How can we encourage
the LLM to focus on the good passages? Some RAG architectures add a reranker
thatreranksorreorderspassagesaftertheyareretrieved. Orsomecomplexquestions
may require multi-hop architectures, in which a query is used to retrieve documents,
which are then appended to the original query for a second stage of retrieval.
Another class of solutions is to train the LLM for RAG. The basic version of
RAG describe above involves no training; we take an off-the-shelf LLM, and give
it the passages and a prompt and hope that it will correctly figure out which pas-
sages are useful or relevant in generating the answer. One learning variant involves
instruction-tuning an LLM, by first creating a dataset of questions annotated with
retrieved passages and correct answers, and then instruction-tuning the LLM to cor-
rectlyanswerthequestionsfromthepassages. Analternativemethodistodothisvia
test-time compute, prompting the LLM to answer the question and simultaneously to
generate reflections on which passages were useful. The process of generating these
reflections may lead the LLM to improve at identifying good passages. The result-
ing reflection text can also be used for in-context learning, for example by using the
text as part of a prompt for further questions.
In addition to training the LLM, we could train the IR engine. After all, the IR
engine itself has not been optimized for the RAG scenario. It might not have been

18 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
trained, or if it was, it was likely trained for simple IR or factoid question-answering
tasks, not for the RAG scenario where the retrieved passages are specifically to be
used by another LLM for generating texts. We can address this mismatch for train-
able IR algorithms by doing end-to-end training of the entire architecture on some
set of questions and answers, training the parameters of the IR model as well as the
LLM.
Finally, it is generally useful for LLMs to give the user evidence for any factual
knowledge statement. This can be in the form of knowledge citations, such as URLs of a
citations
trusted source or citation references to particular literature. For example a question
answering system might generate numbered pointers to URLs as follows:
Q: Which films have Gong Li as a member of their cast?
A: The Story of Qiu Ju [1], Farewell My Concubine [2], The Monkey
King 2 [3], Mulan [3], Saturday Fiction [3] ...
The simplest way for generating knowledge citations is to specify it as part of
the prompt. For example Gao et al. (2023) employ a prompt with text like:
‘‘Write an answer for the given question using only the
provided search results (some of which might be irrelevant)
and cite them properly... Always cite for any factual claim".
11.5 Datasets
There are scores of datasets that contain information needs in the form of questions,
annotated with the answer. These can be used both for instruction tuning and for
evaluation of the question answering abilities of language models.
We can distinguish the datasets along many dimensions, summarized nicely in
Rogers et al. (2023). One is the original purpose of the questions in the data, whether
they were natural information-seeking questions, or whether they were questions
designed for probing: evaluating or testing systems or humans.
Natural On the natural side there are datasets like Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski
Questions
et al., 2019), a set of anonymized English queries to the Google search engine and
their answers. The answers are created by annotators based on Wikipedia infor-
mation, and include a paragraph-length long answer and a short span answer. For
example the question “When are hops added to the brewing process?” has the short
answer the boiling process and a long answer which is an entire paragraph from the
Wikipedia page on Brewing.
MSMARCO A similar natural question set is the MS MARCO (Microsoft Machine Reading
Comprehension) collection of datasets, including 1 million real anonymized English
questions from Microsoft Bing query logs together with a human generated answer
and 9 million passages (Bajaj et al., 2016), that can be used both to test retrieval
ranking and question answering.
Although many datasets focus on English, natural information-seeking ques-
tion datasets exist in other languages. The DuReader dataset is a Chinese QA re-
source based on search engine queries and community QA (He et al., 2018). TyDi
TyDiQA QA dataset contains 204K question-answer pairs from 11 typologically diverse lan-
guages, including Arabic, Bengali, Kiswahili, Russian, and Thai (Clark et al., 2020).
In the TYDI QA task, a system is given a question and the passages from a Wiki-
pedia article and must (a) select the passage containing the answer (or NULL if no
passage contains the answer), and (b) mark the minimal answer span (or NULL).

11.5 • DATASETS 19
MMLU On the probing side are datasets like MMLU (Massive Multitask Language Un-
derstanding), a commonly-used dataset of 15908 knowledge and reasoning ques-
tions in 57 areas including medicine, mathematics, computer science, law, and oth-
ers. MMLU questions are sourced from various exams for humans, such as the US
Graduate Record Exam, Medical Licensing Examination, and Advanced Placement
exams. So the questions don’t represent people’s information needs, but rather are
designed to test human knowledge for academic or licensing purposes. Fig. 11.14
shows some examples, with the correct answers in bold.
MMLU examples
College Computer Science
Any set of Boolean operators that is sufficient to represent all Boolean ex-
pressions is said to be complete. Which of the following is NOT complete?
(A) AND, NOT
(B) NOT, OR
(C) AND, OR
(D) NAND
College Physics
The primary source of the Sun’s energy is a series of thermonuclear
reactions in which the energy produced is c2 times the mass difference
between
(A) two hydrogen atoms and one helium atom
(B) four hydrogen atoms and one helium atom
(C) six hydrogen atoms and two helium atoms
(D) three helium atoms and one carbon atom
International Law
Which of the following is a treaty-based human rights mechanism?
(A) The UN Human Rights Committee
(B) The UN Human Rights Council
(C) The UN Universal Periodic Review
(D) The UN special mandates
Prehistory
Unlike most other early civilizations, Minoan culture shows little evidence
of
(A) trade.
(B) warfare.
(C) the development of a common religion.
(D) conspicuous consumption by elites.
Figure 11.14 Example problems from MMLU
Some of the question datasets described above augment each question with pas-
sage(s) from which the answer can be extracted. These datasets were mainly created
reading for an earlier QA task called reading comprehension in which a model is given
comprehension
a question and a document and is required to extract the answer from the given
document. We sometimes call the task of question answering given one or more
openbook documents (for example via RAG), the open book QA task, while the task of an-

20 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
closedbook swering directly from the LM with no retrieval component at all is the closed book
QA task.5 Thus datasets like Natural Questions can be treated as open book if the
solver uses each question’s attached document, or closed book if the documents are
not used, while datasets like MMLU are solely closed book.
Another dimension of variation is the format of the answer: multiple-choice
versus freeform. And of course there are variations in prompting, like whether the
model is just the question (zero-shot) or also given demonstrations of answers to
similar questions (few-shot). MMLU offers both zero-shot and few-shot prompt
options.
11.6 Evaluating Question Answering
Two techniques are commonly employed to evaluate question-answering systems,
with the choice depending on the type of question and QA situation. For multiple
choice questions like in MMLU, we report exact match:
Exact match: The % of predicted answers that match the gold answer
exactly.
For questions with free text answers, like Natural Questions, we commonly evalu-
ated with token F score to roughly measure the partial string overlap between the
answer and the reference answer:
F score: The average token overlap between predicted and gold an-
swers. Treat the prediction and gold as a bag of tokens, and compute F
for each question, then return the average F over all questions.
11.7 Summary
This chapter introduced the tasks of information retrieval and the use of retrieval
augmented generation (RAG) to use retrieved passages to improve question an-
swering and other factual generations from LLMs.
• We focus in this chapter on the use of information retrieval for question an-
swering and related factually-based tasks. The idea is to meet the user’s in-
formation needs by drawing on the material in some set of documents (which
might be the web).
• Information Retrieval (IR) is the task of returning documents to a user based
on their information need as expressed in a query. In ranked retrieval, the
documents are returned in ranked order.
• TwoparadigmsforIRaresparseretrievalanddenseretrieval. Bothparadigms
use a document’s similarity to the query as an estimate of its relevance to the
user’s information need
• In sparse retrieval techniques, we represent both the query and the document
as sparse vectors of the unigram counts of the words they contain, each count
weighted by tf-idf or BM25. Then the query-document similarity can be mea-
sured by the cosine between these sparse vectors.
5 This repurposes the word for types of exams in which students are allowed to ‘open their books’ or
not.

HISTORICAL NOTES 21
• The inverted index is a storage mechanism for sparse retrieval that makes it
very efficient to find documents that have a particular word.
• In dense retrieval techniques, documents or queries are instead represented as
embeddings(densevectors)computedbyalanguagemodel(whetherencoder-
only models like the BERT family, or decoder-only). Document-query simi-
larity is computed as dot product or cosine in they embedding space.
• For dense retrieval, FAISS is an approximate nearest neighbor vector search
algorithm that makes it very efficient to find the k most similar document
embeddings to a query embedding, making it quick to do ranking.
• Ranked retrieval is generally evaluated by mean average precision or inter-
polated precision.
• Retrievalcanbeincorporatedintolanguagemodelingviaretrieval-augmented
generation. In the retrieval step, the user query is passed to the search engine
to retrieve a set of relevant documents or passages. In the generation stage,
a large language model is prompted with the query and a set of documents
retrieved from the collection, and then conditionally generates an answer.
• Factual tasks like question answering can be evaluated by exact match with a
known answer if only a single answer is given, with token F score for free
text answers.
Historical Notes
Question answering was one of the earliest NLP tasks. By 1961 the BASEBALL
system (Green et al., 1961) answered questions about baseball games like “Where
did the Red Sox play on July 7” by querying a structured database of game infor-
mation. The database was stored as a kind of attribute-value matrix with values for
attributes of each game:
Month = July
Place = Boston
Day = 7
Game Serial No. = 96
(Team = Red Sox, Score = 5)
(Team = Yankees, Score = 3)
Each question was constituency-parsed using the algorithm of Zellig Harris’s
TDAP project at the University of Pennsylvania, essentially a cascade of finite-state
transducers (see the historical discussion in Joshi and Hopely 1999 and Karttunen
1999). Then in a content analysis phase each word or phrase was associated with a
program that computed parts of its meaning. Thus the phrase ‘Where’ had code to
assign the semantics Place = ?, with the result that the question “Where did the
Red Sox play on July 7” was assigned the meaning
Place = ?
Team = Red Sox
Month = July
Day = 7
The question is then matched against the database to return the answer.

22 CHAPTER 11 • RETRIEVAL-BASED MODELS
The Protosynthex system of Simmons et al. (1964), given a question, formed a
query from the content words in the question, and then retrieved candidate answer
sentences in the document, ranked by their frequency-weighted term overlap with
the question. The query and each retrieved sentence were then parsed with depen-
dency parsers, and the sentence whose structure best matches the question structure
selected. Thus the question What do worms eat? would match worms eat grass:
both have the subject worms as a dependent of eat, in the version of dependency
grammar used at the time, while birds eat worms has birds as the subject:
What do worms eat Worms eat grass Birds eat worms
Simmons (1965) summarizes other early QA systems.
By the 1970s, systems used predicate calculus as the meaning representation
LUNAR language. The LUNAR system (Woods et al. 1972, Woods 1978) was designed to
beanaturallanguageinterfacetoadatabaseofchemicalfactsaboutlunargeology. It
could answer questions like Do any samples have greater than 13 percent aluminum
by parsing them into a logical form
(TEST (FOR SOME X16 / (SEQ SAMPLES) : T ; (CONTAIN’ X16
(NPR* X17 / (QUOTE AL203)) (GREATERTHAN 13 PCT))))
By the 1990s question answering shifted to machine learning. Zelle and Mooney
(1996) proposed to treat question answering as a semantic parsing task, by creat-
ing the Prolog-based GEOQUERY dataset of questions about US geography. This
model was extended by Zettlemoyer and Collins (2005) and 2007. By a decade
later, neural models were applied to semantic parsing (Dong and Lapata 2016, Jia
and Liang 2016), and then to knowledge-based question answering by mapping text
to SQL (Iyer et al., 2017).
[TBD: History of IR.]
Meanwhile, a paradigm for answering questions that drew more on information-
retrieval was influenced by the rise of the web in the 1990s. The U.S. government-
sponsored TREC (Text REtrieval Conference) evaluations, run annually since 1992,
provideatestbedforevaluatinginformation-retrievaltasksandtechniques(Voorhees
and Harman, 2005). TREC added an influential QA track in 1999, which led to a
wide variety of factoid and non-factoid question answering systems competing in
annual evaluations.
At that same time, Hirschman et al. (1999) introduced the idea of using chil-
dren’s reading comprehension tests to evaluate machine text comprehension algo-
rithms. They acquired a corpus of 120 passages with 5 questions each designed for
3rd-6th grade children, built an answer extraction system, and measured how well
the answers given by their system corresponded to the answer key from the test’s
publisher. Their algorithm focused on word overlap as a feature; later algorithms
added named entity features and more complex similarity between the question and
the answer span (Riloff and Thelen 2000, Ng et al. 2000).
The DeepQA component of the Watson Jeopardy! system was a large and so-
phisticated feature-based system developed just before neural systems became com-
mon. It is described in a series of papers in volume 56 of the IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development, e.g., Ferrucci (2012).
Early neural reading comprehension systems drew on the insight common to
earlysystemsthatanswerfindingshouldfocusonquestion-passagesimilarity. Many

EXERCISES 23
of the architectural outlines of these neural systems were laid out in Hermann et al.
(2015), Chen et al. (2017), and Seo et al. (2017). These systems focused on datasets
like Rajpurkar et al. (2016) and Rajpurkar et al. (2018) and their successors, usually
using separate IR algorithms as input to neural reading comprehension systems. The
paradigm of using dense retrieval with a span-based reader, often with a single end-
to-end architecture, is exemplified by systems like Lee et al. (2019) or Karpukhin
et al. (2020). An important research area with dense retrieval for open-domain QA
is training data: using self-supervised methods to avoid having to label positive and
negative passages (Sachan et al., 2023).
Early work on large language models showed that they stored sufficient knowl-
edge in the pretraining process to answer questions (Petroni et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2020), at first not competitively
with special-purpose question answerers, but quickly surpassing them. Retrieval-
augmented generation algorithms were first introduced as a way to improve lan-
guage modeling word prediction (Khandelwal et al., 2019), but were quickly applied
to question answering (Izacard et al., 2022; Ram et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023).
Exercises

24 Chapter 11 • Retrieval-based Models
Babbage, C. 1864. Passages from the Life of a Philosopher. Johnson, J., M. Douze, and H. Je ́gou. 2017. Billion-
Longman. scale similarity search with GPUs. ArXiv preprint
Bajaj, P., D. Campos, N. Craswell, L. Deng, J. G. ando arXiv:1702.08734.
Xiaodong Liu, R. Majumder, A. McNamara, B. Mitra, Joshi, A. K. and P. Hopely. 1999. A parser from antiquity.
T. Nguye, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, A. Stoica, S. Tiwary, In A. Kornai, ed., Extended Finite State Models of Lan-
and T. Wang. 2016. MS MARCO: A human generated guage,6–15.CambridgeUniversityPress.
MAchineReadingCOmprehensiondataset. NeurIPS. Jurafsky, D. 2014. The Language of Food. W. W. Norton,
Chen,D.,A.Fisch,J.Weston,andA.Bordes.2017. Reading NewYork.
Wikipediatoansweropen-domainquestions. ACL. Kamphuis, C., A. P. de Vries, L. Boytsov, and J. Lin. 2020.
Clark, J. H., E. Choi, M. Collins, D. Garrette, Which BM25 do you mean? a large-scale reproducibil-
T. Kwiatkowski, V. Nikolaev, and J. Palomaki. 2020. ity study of scoring variants. European Conference on
TyDi QA: A benchmark for information-seeking ques- InformationRetrieval.
tionansweringintypologicallydiverselanguages. TACL, Karpukhin,V.,B.Og ̆uz,S.Min,P.Lewis,L.Wu,S.Edunov,
8:454–470. D.Chen,andW.-t.Yih.2020. Densepassageretrievalfor
Dahl,M.,V.Magesh,M.Suzgun,andD.E.Ho.2024. Large open-domainquestionanswering. EMNLP.
legal fictions: Profiling legal hallucinations in large lan- Karttunen, L. 1999. Comments on Joshi. In A. Kornai, ed.,
guagemodels. JournalofLegalAnalysis,16:64–93. Extended Finite State Models of Language, 16–18. Cam-
Deerwester, S. C., S. T. Dumais, T. K. Landauer, G. W. Fur- bridgeUniversityPress.
nas, and R. A. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent se- Khandelwal, U., O. Levy, D. Jurafsky, L. Zettlemoyer, and
manticsanalysis. JASIS,41(6):391–407. M. Lewis. 2019. Generalization through memorization:
Dong, L. and M. Lapata. 2016. Language to logical form Nearestneighborlanguagemodels. ICLR.
withneuralattention. ACL. Khattab, O., C. Potts, and M. Zaharia. 2021. Relevance-
Ferrucci,D.A.2012. Introductionto“ThisisWatson”. IBM guided supervision for OpenQA with ColBERT. TACL,
JournalofResearchandDevelopment,56(3/4):1:1–1:15. 9:929–944.
Furnas, G. W., T. K. Landauer, L. M. Gomez, and S. T. Khattab, O. and M. Zaharia. 2020. ColBERT: Efficient and
Dumais. 1987. The vocabulary problem in human- effective passage search via contextualized late interac-
system communication. Communications of the ACM, tionoverBERT. SIGIR.
30(11):964–971. Kwiatkowski, T., J. Palomaki, O. Redfield, M. Collins,
Gao, T., H. Yen, J. Yu, and D. Chen. 2023. Enabling large A. Parikh, C. Alberti, D. Epstein, I. Polosukhin, J. De-
languagemodelstogeneratetextwithcitations. EMNLP. vlin, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, L. Jones, M. Kelcey, M.-W.
Chang, A. M. Dai, J. Uszkoreit, Q. Le, and S. Petrov.
Geva, M., R. Schuster, J. Berant, and O. Levy. 2021.
2019. Natural questions: A benchmark for question an-
Transformerfeed-forwardlayersarekey-valuememories.
sweringresearch. TACL,7:452–466.
EMNLP.
Lee, K., M.-W. Chang, and K. Toutanova. 2019. Latent re-
Green, B. F., A. K. Wolf, C. Chomsky, and K. Laughery.
trieval for weakly supervised open domain question an-
1961. Baseball: An automatic question answerer. Pro-
swering. ACL.
ceedingsoftheWesternJointComputerConference19.
Manning, C. D., P. Raghavan, and H. Schu ̈tze. 2008. Intro-
He, W., K. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lyu, S. Zhao, X. Xiao, Y. Liu,
ductiontoInformationRetrieval. Cambridge.
Y. Wang, H. Wu, Q. She, X. Liu, T. Wu, and H. Wang.
2018. DuReader: a Chinese machine reading compre- Meng,K.,D.Bau,A.Andonian,andY.Belinkov.2022. Lo-
hension dataset from real-world applications. Workshop cating and editing factual associations in GPT. NeurIPS,
onMachineReadingforQuestionAnswering. volume36.
Ng, H. T., L. H. Teo, and J. L. P. Kwan. 2000. A ma-
Hermann, K. M., T. Kocisky, E. Grefenstette, L. Espeholt,
chine learning approach to answering questions for read-
W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom. 2015. Teaching
machinestoreadandcomprehend. NeurIPS. ingcomprehensiontests. EMNLP.
Petroni, F., T. Rockta ̈schel, S. Riedel, P. Lewis, A. Bakhtin,
Hirschman, L., M. Light, E. Breck, and J. D. Burger. 1999.
Y. Wu, and A. Miller. 2019. Language models as knowl-
DeepRead: Areadingcomprehensionsystem. ACL.
edgebases? EMNLP.
Iyer, S., I. Konstas, A. Cheung, J. Krishnamurthy, and
Radford, A., J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and
L. Zettlemoyer. 2017. Learning a neural semantic parser
I. Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised
fromuserfeedback. ACL.
multitasklearners. OpenAItechreport.
Izacard, G., P. Lewis, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, F. Petroni,
Raffel, C., N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang,
T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Joulin, S. Riedel, and
M.Matena,Y.Zhou,W.Li,andP.J.Liu.2020.Exploring
E. Grave. 2022. Few-shot learning with retrieval aug-
the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
mentedlanguagemodels. ArXivpreprint.
transformer. JMLR,21(140):1–67.
Jia, R. and P. Liang. 2016. Data recombination for neural
Rajpurkar, P., R. Jia, and P. Liang. 2018. Know what you
semanticparsing. ACL.
don’tknow: UnanswerablequestionsforSQuAD. ACL.
Jiang,C.,B.Qi,X.Hong,D.Fu,Y.Cheng,F.Meng,M.Yu,
Rajpurkar, P., J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. 2016.
B. Zhou, and J. Zhou. 2024. On large language models’
SQuAD:100,000+questionsformachinecomprehension
hallucinationwithregardtoknownfacts. NAACLHLT.
oftext. EMNLP.

Exercises 25
Ram,O.,Y.Levine,I.Dalmedigos,D.Muhlgay,A.Shashua,
K. Leyton-Brown, and Y. Shoham. 2023. In-context
retrieval-augmentedlanguagemodels. ArXivpreprint.
Riloff, E. and M. Thelen. 2000. A rule-based ques-
tion answering system for reading comprehension tests.
ANLP/NAACLworkshoponreadingcomprehensiontests.
Roberts, A., C. Raffel, and N. Shazeer. 2020. How much
knowledge can you pack into the parameters of a lan-
guagemodel? EMNLP.
Robertson, S., S. Walker, S. Jones, M. M. Hancock-
Beaulieu, and M. Gatford. 1995. Okapi at TREC-3.
OverviewoftheThirdTextREtrievalConference(TREC-
3).
Rogers,A.,M.Gardner,andI.Augenstein.2023.QAdataset
explosion: A taxonomy of NLP resources for question
answering and reading comprehension. ACM Computing
Surveys,55(10):1–45.
Sachan, D. S., M. Lewis, D. Yogatama, L. Zettlemoyer,
J. Pineau, and M. Zaheer. 2023. Questions are all you
need to train a dense passage retriever. TACL, 11:600–
616.
Salton,G.1971. TheSMARTRetrievalSystem: Experiments
inAutomaticDocumentProcessing. PrenticeHall.
Seo, M., A. Kembhavi, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi. 2017.
Bidirectional attention flow for machine comprehension.
ICLR.
Shi, W., S. Min, M. Yasunaga, M. Seo, R. James, M. Lewis,
L.Zettlemoyer,andW.-t.Yih.2023.REPLUG:Retrieval-
augmentedblack-boxlanguagemodels. ArXivpreprint.
Simmons,R.F.1965. AnsweringEnglishquestionsbycom-
puter: Asurvey. CACM,8(1):53–70.
Simmons, R. F., S. Klein, and K. McConlogue. 1964. In-
dexinganddependencylogicforansweringEnglishques-
tions. AmericanDocumentation,15(3):196–204.
Sparck Jones, K. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term
specificityanditsapplicationinretrieval.JournalofDoc-
umentation,28(1):11–21.
Voorhees, E. M. and D. K. Harman. 2005. TREC: Experi-
mentandEvaluationinInformationRetrieval.MITPress.
Woods, W. A. 1978. Semantics and quantification in natural
languagequestionanswering.InM.Yovits,ed.,Advances
inComputers,2–64.Academic.
Woods,W.A.,R.M.Kaplan,andB.L.Nash-Webber.1972.
The lunar sciences natural language information system:
Finalreport. TechnicalReport2378,BBN.
Zelle, J. M. and R. J. Mooney. 1996. Learning to parse
database queries using inductive logic programming.
AAAI.
Zettlemoyer, L. and M. Collins. 2005. Learning to map
sentences to logical form: Structured classification with
probabilistic categorial grammars. Uncertainty in Artifi-
cialIntelligence,UAI’05.
Zettlemoyer, L. and M. Collins. 2007. Online learning
of relaxed CCG grammars for parsing to logical form.
EMNLP/CoNLL.
Zhou, K., J. Hwang, X. Ren, and M. Sap. 2024. Relying
ontheunreliable: Theimpactoflanguagemodels’reluc-
tancetoexpressuncertainty. ACL.