Lecture 5b. Ensemble Methods and Boosted Trees for
Classification
Data mining, prof. Biljana Tojtovska Ribarski
FCSE, Skopje
Contents
1 Ensemble Methods and Boosted Trees for Classification 1
1.1 From a Single Tree to an Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Why Single Trees Can Be Unstable? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 The General Idea of Ensemble Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.4 Bagging: Averaging Many Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.5 Out-of-Bag Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.6 Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.7 Measuring Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.8 Boosting: Sequential Error Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.9 AdaBoost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.10 Gradient Boosting for Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2 Modern Boosted Tree Systems 16
2.1 Common backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2 Design differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3 XGBoost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4 LightGBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5 CatBoost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.6 Practical Hyperparameters and Their Meaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.7 Practical Do’s and Don’ts for Modern Boosted Tree Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.8 Compact Comparison of Tree-Based Classification Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.9 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1 Ensemble Methods and Boosted Trees for Classification
1.1 From a Single Tree to an Ensemble
In the previous lectures, decision trees were introduced as intuitive classification models: they
partition the feature space through a sequence of split conditions and produce a class decision at
the leaves. They are attractive because they are easy to read, easy to visualize, and naturally
handle nonlinear interactions.
But the previous lectures also established three important ideas:
• a model should be judged by its performance on unseen data, not by training fit alone;
• classifier quality depends on the practical goal, the class distribution, and the consequences
of errors;

• a tree that looks convincing on one sample may change noticeably if the sample changes.
Next we want to understand what happens when many trees are combined into one stronger
classifier.
Insight 1.1: Why this is the natural next step?
A single tree is often attractive because of interpretability, but it may be unstable and
may overfit. Ensemble methods are a natural continuation because they try to keep the
flexibility of tree-based learning while improving stability and predictive performance.
1.2 Why Single Trees Can Be Unstable?
A decision tree is built greedily: at each node, the algorithm searches for a split that looks best
according to some impurity criterion such as entropy, Gini index, or misclassification error. Small
changes in the training data may change which split looks best. Once an early split changes, the
whole lower part of the tree may change as well.
Definition 1.1: Decision tree instability
A decision tree is called unstable if small perturbations in the training data can produce a
noticeably different fitted tree and therefore different predictions.
Example 1.1: Medical triage threshold instability
Suppose a hospital uses a decision tree at triage to classify patients into Urgent
respiratory condition versus Non-urgent other condition. If one or two patients
close to a threshold on oxygen saturation or symptom severity are added, removed, or
corrected, the first split of the tree may change. Then the entire diagnostic structure below
that split may change as well.
This instability is closely related to the bias-variance tradeoff. A shallow tree is often too simple
and may have high bias. A very deep tree may capture detailed local structure, but it may also
become too sensitive to accidental patterns in the training data, which leads to high variance.
Definition 1.2: Bias-variance tradeoff
The bias-variance tradeoff describes two competing sources of prediction error:
• bias: error that occurs when a model is too rigid or too simple to capture the true
underlying pattern in the data well. Such a model makes restrictive assumptions and
can systematically produce inaccurate predictions.
• variance: error that occurs when a model depends too strongly on the particular
training sample. In that case, small changes in the training data can lead to a
noticeably different fitted model and different predictions.
A good model should be flexible enough to capture the real structure in the data, but
stable enough that small changes in the training sample do not lead to large changes in
prediction.
Remark 1.1: Why this matters?
Instability is not automatically bad. In fact, it becomes useful in ensemble learning. If
different training perturbations produce different trees, then those trees may make different
errors, and combining them can improve generalization.

1.3 The General Idea of Ensemble Learning
An ensemble combines multiple base models into one final predictor. For classification, the
combination is often made by majority vote or by aggregating scores or probabilities.
When the base learners are trees, two broad ensemble philosophies dominate:
1. Bagging: build many trees independently on perturbed versions of the training data and
aggregate their predictions.
2. Boosting: build trees sequentially so that each new tree improves what the current ensemble
is still getting wrong.
Definition 1.3: Ensemble method
An ensemble method is a learning strategy that combines several base models into one
final predictor, usually to improve stability, robustness, or predictive accuracy.
Remark 1.2: Two fundamentally different ideas
Although bagging and boosting both combine many trees, they should not be treated as
the same idea:
• bagging mainly reduces variance through averaging;
• boosting mainly improves predictive fit through sequential correction.
1.4 Bagging: Averaging Many Trees
1.4.1 Bootstrap sampling
Bagging begins with the bootstrap. A bootstrap sample is obtained by sampling, with replacement,
from the training set until one again has a sample of the same nominal size.
Definition 1.4: Bootstrap sample
Given a dataset of size n, a bootstrap sample is obtained by drawing n observations
with replacement from the original dataset.
Sampling with replacement means that after an observation is drawn, it is placed back and can
be drawn again. Thus one bootstrap sample may contain repeated copies of some observations,
while others may not appear at all. This repetition is not an error; it is the central mechanism of
the bootstrap.
Example 1.2: Bootstrap example
If the training set is
{A,B,C,D,E},
then a valid bootstrap sample of size 5 could be
{B,B,D,E,E}.
Here, B and E appear twice, while A and C are absent.
Remark 1.3: What bootstrap resampling means in practice?
Bootstrap resampling is a way to mimic repeated sampling from the population by using
the observed dataset as an empirical stand-in for that population. If a train/validation/test

split already exists, bootstrap resampling is applied to the training set, while the validation
and test sets remain untouched.
Warning 1.1: Bootstrap is not a universal fix
Bootstrap resampling does not automatically preserve every important structure. If the
data are time-dependent, clustered, severely imbalanced, or already contaminated by
leakage, then ordinary bootstrap may reproduce the wrong structure. The resampling unit
must match the data-generating structure. (In such cases, one uses adapted resampling
schemes, such as block bootstrap for time-dependent data, cluster-level resampling for
grouped data, or stratified resampling when class proportions must be preserved.)
1.4.2 Bagging algorithm
Algorithm 1.1: Bagging for classification
Let the training set be
D = {(x ,y )|i ∈ {1,2,...,n}}
i i
Choose the number of trees B.
For b = 1,...,B:
1. draw a bootstrap sample D(b) from D;
2. train a decision tree T on D(b).
For a new unseen observation x, obtain predictions T (x),...,T (x) and predict the class
1 B
by majority vote.
For classification, bagging may combine the trees either by majority vote on the predicted class
labels or by averaging class scores/probabilities and then assigning the class using a chosen
threshold.
1.4.3 Why bagging works?
Bagging is most effective when the base learner is unstable. Different bootstrap samples produce
somewhat different trees. If those trees do not make exactly the same errors, averaging or voting
can reduce the net effect of sample-specific noise.
Insight 1.2: Bagging as variance reduction
Bagging is best understood as a variance-reduction method. It does not try to learn one
perfect tree. Instead, it averages many unstable trees so that random fluctuations of
individual trees matter less.
Remark 1.4: Why the correlation of errors matters?
Each tree’s prediction error can be viewed as having two parts: a part coming from the
real difficulty of the problem, and a part coming from random sample-specific noise, that
is, from accidental patterns present in the particular bootstrap sample on which that tree
was trained. The role of bagging is mainly to reduce this second part.
The key question is whether different trees make similar random errors or different random
errors. This is captured by the correlation ρ between their errors. If ρ is high, the trees
tend to be wrong on the same cases in the same way, so averaging helps little. For example,
if for one case the true target is 0, and three trees predict 0.9, 0.85, and 0.88, then all three
are making almost the same error, so their average is still about 0.877, which remains far

from the truth. In contrast, if the three trees predict 0.9, 0.2, and 0.1, then their errors
are less aligned, and their average is
0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1
= 0.4,
which is noticeably closer to the true target. This is what it means that averaging can
cancel part of the noise.
In simplified form, if each tree has error variance σ2 and the pairwise error correlation is ρ,
then the variance of the average of B trees is approximately
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 − ρ
Var(f) ≈ σ2 ρ + .
Thus, when ρ is smaller, averaging many trees reduces variance much more; when ρ is
close to 1, the trees behave too similarly, so bagging has much less effect.
1.4.4 What bagging does and does not do?
Bagging can improve predictive stability, but it does not solve every problem.
• It does not repair data leakage.
• It does not guarantee interpretability.
• It does not eliminate the need for validation.
• It does not fix a poor label definition or a poor feature set.
1.5 Out-of-Bag Error
When a tree is trained on a bootstrap sample, not every training observation is selected into that
sample. The observations that are left out can still be used in a useful way: they act like a small
temporary test set for that particular tree. These omitted observations are called out-of-bag
observations.
Definition 1.5: Out-of-bag observation
For a given bootstrap sample, an observation is out-of-bag if it was not included in that
sample.
Now consider one training observation. Some trees were trained using it, but some trees did not
see it at all because it was out-of-bag for them. We can therefore predict its class using only the
trees that did not use it during training. If we do this for all training observations and compare
the aggregated predictions to the true classes, we obtain the out-of-bag error.
Remark 1.5: Why OOB is useful?
Out-of-bag error is especially useful in bagging and Random Forest because it provides a
built-in estimate of predictive performance as part of the training procedure itself. This
allows evaluation without creating an extra validation split inside the training data, and
often with less computational cost than repeated cross-validation.

Warning 1.2: What OOB does not replace?
Out-of-bag error is helpful, but it does not replace a final untouched test set. Final model
assessment should still be based on honest evaluation on data not used in model building.
1.6 Random Forest
1.6.1 Why plain bagging is not always enough?
If every bagged tree sees all features at every split, many trees may become too similar, especially
when one variable is very dominant. In that case, averaging many similar trees brings less benefit
than averaging more diverse trees.
1.6.2 The Random Forest idea
Random Forest extends bagging by adding feature randomness. Each tree is trained on a
bootstrap sample, but at each split the algorithm considers only a random subset of candidate
features.
Definition 1.6: Random Forest
A Random Forest is an ensemble of decision trees in which:
• each tree is trained on a bootstrap sample of the data;
• each split is chosen from a random subset of features rather than from all features;
• final prediction is obtained by majority vote in classification.
This produces two sources of randomness:
• observation-level randomness through bootstrapping;
• feature-level randomness through random candidate subsets.
The purpose of the second source is to reduce correlation among the trees, so that averaging
becomes more effective. Here, and in the rest of the lecture notes, "averaging" does not mean
averaging the trees themselves. It means averaging the predictions they produce, such as class
scores or estimated probabilities. If the trees output only class labels, the ensemble prediction is
usually obtained by majority vote.
Algorithm 1.2: Random Forest for classification
Let the training set be
D = {(x ,y )|i ∈ {1,2,...,n}}
i i
Choose the number of trees B.
For b = 1,...,B:
1. draw a bootstrap sample D(b);
2. grow a tree on D(b);
3. at each node, choose the split only from a random subset of m features rather than
all p features.
For prediction, aggregate the trees using a majority vote, or by averaging their predicted
class probabilities (soft voting).

Example 1.3: Medical triage and dominant variables
Suppose oxygen saturation is by far the strongest triage variable. Under plain bagging,
many trees may repeatedly split first on that same variable. Under Random Forest, some
trees are forced to consider other variables such as respiratory rate, reported symptom
severity, or patient age. This increases diversity across trees and may improve the ensemble.
Remark 1.6: Interpretation of Random Forest
Random Forest is often the first strong ensemble baseline in practice because it is: accurate
on many tabular datasets, relatively robust, less sensitive to tuning than many boosted
methods, naturally suited to nonlinear interactions.
At the same time, Random Forests are less transparent than a single tree, and feature importance
measures require careful interpretation, especially in the presence of correlated variables.
Remark 1.7: Transparency and feature importance in Random Forests
A single decision tree is transparent because one can literally read its splits from top to
bottom and explain a prediction as a path such as “if age > 50 and cholesterol > 220, then
class = risk.” A Random Forest is an average of many trees, often hundreds, so there is no
single simple path that represents the whole model. This usually improves prediction, but
it reduces interpretability.
Feature importance also requires care. In a Random Forest, an important variable is
usually one that helps prediction a lot across the ensemble. But this becomes tricky when
variables are correlated. For example, suppose both age and years_since_retirement
carry almost the same information. The forest may use one of them in some trees and
the other in other trees. Then the apparent importance may be split between them, or
one may look unimportant only because its correlated partner was chosen first. Thus,
“low importance” does not always mean “no information,” and “high importance” does not
always mean “unique causal role.”
1.7 Measuring Feature Importance
Because we cannot trace a single decision path in a Random Forest, feature importance is usually
assessed by measuring how much each variable contributes to the predictive performance of the
ensemble. Two common methods are:
• Impurity-based importance (Gini importance): This sums the reduction in node
impurity (such as the Gini index or entropy) achieved by a feature across all trees. It is fast
to compute, but it can be misleading when predictors are highly correlated or when some
variables have many possible split points or many categories.
• Permutation importance: This measures how much predictive performance worsens when
the values of one feature are randomly shuffled in validation, test, or out-of-bag data. A
large drop in performance suggests that the model relied strongly on that feature.
When predictors are strongly correlated, feature importance should be interpreted with caution,
because correlated variables may share predictive information. In such cases, it is often useful to
examine correlated features together, or to use grouped permutation importance, rather than
assuming that one variable alone carries the entire importance.

1.8 Boosting: Sequential Error Correction
Bagging builds trees independently and then aggregates them. Boosting is fundamentally different.
It builds trees one after another, and each new tree is chosen specifically to improve the current
ensemble.
Definition 1.7: Boosting
Boosting is an ensemble strategy in which base learners are added sequentially, each one
chosen to improve the performance of the current ensemble.
The core idea is:
Do not try to learn one perfect tree. Learn a sequence of small trees, where each new
tree corrects part of what the current ensemble still gets wrong.
If h (x) denotes the prediction of the t-th tree, a boosted model often has the additive form
(cid:88)
F(x) = ηh (x),
t=1
where
• h (x) is the prediction of the t-th tree,
• η > 0 is the learning rate,
• T is the number of boosting rounds.
Bagging Boosting
correct error correct error
Training
Current
data Tree 1 Tree 2 Tree 3
model
Tree 1 Tree 2 Tree 3
Additive ensemble
Vote / average
Figure 1: Bagging builds trees in parallel and aggregates them. Boosting builds trees sequentially,
where each new tree improves the current ensemble.
There are two useful interpretations:
• Error-focused view Early boosting methods are often explained as increasing the influence
of misclassified examples. Hard cases receive more attention from later learners.
• Residual or gradient view. Modern gradient boosting generalizes this idea. At each step,
the algorithm computes how the current model is wrong according to a chosen loss function,
then fits the next tree to that error signal.
The second view is more general and leads directly to modern boosted tree systems.

1.9 AdaBoost
AdaBoost is the classical error-focused boosting method. Its main idea is simple: observations
that are hard to classify receive more weight in later rounds, so that the next weak learner pays
more attention to them.
In practice, the weak learner is often a very small tree, for example a decision stump, that is, a
tree with only one split.
In its classical form, AdaBoost is often written with labels coded as y ∈ {−1,+1}. This is only
a coding convention; the conceptual idea is still binary classification.
Algorithm 1.3: AdaBoost for binary classification
Start with equal observation weights:
(1)
w = , i = 1,...,n.
i n
For t = 1,...,T:
1. fit a weak classifier h using the current observation weights, so that observations with
larger weights matter more in training;
2. compute its weighted error:
(cid:88) (t)
err = w 1{h (x ) ̸= y };
t i t i i
i=1
3. assign the learner weight:
1 1 − err
α = log ;
2 err
4. update and normalize the observation weights:
(t) (cid:0) (cid:1)
w exp −α y h (x )
w (t+1) = i t i t i .
i (cid:80)n
(t)
exp
(cid:0)
−α y h (x )
(cid:1)
j=1 j t j t j
The final classifier is obtained by a weighted vote of the weak learners:
(cid:32) T (cid:33)
(cid:88)
H(x) = sign α h (x) .
t t
t=1
Thus, weak learners with smaller weighted error receive larger weights and have more
influence on the final prediction.
Remark 1.8: Interpreting the learner weight α
The quantity α determines how much influence the t-th weak learner has in the final
weighted vote. If
0 < err < 0.5,
then α > 0, so the learner receives a positive weight. If
err = 0.5,
then α = 0, so the learner contributes nothing to the final classifier.
If err = 0 (respectively, err = 1), then the weak learner classified all weighted observations
t t

correctly (respectively, incorrectly), and the formula for α is not finite. In practice, this
corresponds to a degenerate case, and one usually stops early or handles it separately.
Thus, AdaBoost is intended for weak learners that perform at least slightly better than
random guessing, typically with
0 < err < 0.5.
Remark 1.9: How Step 4 changes the observation weights
Since both y and h (x ) take values in {−1,+1}, the condition
i t i
h (x ) = y
t i i
means that observation i is classified correctly, while
h (x ) ̸= y
t i i
means that it is classified incorrectly.
Step 4 increases the influence of misclassified observations and decreases the influence of
correctly classified ones. Before normalization, the update can be written as
(t+1)
w
(t) e−αt, if h
(x
) = y
w ∝
i w
(t) eαt, if h
(x
) ̸= y
Thus, correctly classified observations are downweighted, while misclassified observations
are upweighted. After that, the weights are normalized so that they sum to 1.
Insight 1.3: AdaBoost versus bagging
Bagging builds many trees independently and stabilizes prediction by aggregation. Ad-
aBoost builds learners sequentially and changes the observation weights from round to
round so that later learners focus more on cases that were previously misclassified.
Warning 1.3: A practical caution
Because AdaBoost repeatedly increases the influence of observations that were misclassified
in earlier rounds, it can over-focus on mislabeled cases, outliers, or strong noise. In such
situations, the algorithm may keep trying to correct observations that should not be fitted
closely, which can hurt generalization. This sensitivity is a general property of the method.
In modern tabular-data applications, AdaBoost is often less preferred, because stronger
and more flexible boosted-tree methods are available.
1.10 Gradient Boosting for Classification
1.10.1 From scores to probabilities
In binary classification, gradient boosting usually models a score function F(x) rather than a
class label directly. This fits naturally with what we already know from logistic regression: a
score may be transformed into a probability through the logistic function.

Insight 1.4: Score function and probability
In binary classification, a model may first produce a score F(x) and then convert it to a
probability by
p(x) = σ(F(x)) = .
1 + e−F(x)
If F(x) is interpreted on a log-odds-like scale, then the logistic function turns that score
into a probability between 0 and 1.
A class label is then obtained only after choosing a threshold. If the threshold is 0.5, this
corresponds to predicting class 1 when the estimated probability is at least 0.5. But as discussed
in the earlier lecture on evaluation and cost-sensitive classification, the threshold should depend
on the application, the class distribution, and the cost of errors.
Remark 1.10: Connection to logistic regression
The connection to logistic regression is conceptual rather than identical in form. In both
settings, one can think in terms of a score that is converted to a probability. But logistic
regression models one global linear relation, while gradient boosting builds an additive
sequence of trees that can capture nonlinearities and interactions.
1.10.2 Generic gradient-boosting algorithm
Let L(y,s) be a loss function, differentiable with respect to s. Gradient boosting generalizes the
error-correction idea by using the loss function to define what the next correction should be.
Algorithm 1.4: Generic gradient boosting
Let L(y,s) be a loss function, differentiable with respect to s.
Initialize the model with a simple constant score function:
(cid:88)
F (x) = c, where c = argmin L(y ,u).
0 i
i=1
Choose the learning rate η > 0 and the number of boosting rounds T.
For t = 1,...,T:
1. for each training observation x , compute the pseudo-residual
(cid:12)
∂L(y
,s)(cid:12)
r it = − (cid:12) ;
∂s (cid:12)
s=Ft−1(xi)
2. fit a regression tree h (x) to the targets r , including appropriate numerical values in
t it
its leaves;
3. update the model score function:
F (x) = F (x) + ηh (x).
t t−1 t
After T rounds, use the final score F (x) to produce a probability or a class label.
Remark 1.11: Meaning of the notation in the algorithm
In the algorithm above:
• (x ,y ) is the i-th training observation and its class label;
i i

• L(y,s) is the loss function, differentiable with respect to s;
• η is the learning rate;
• T is the total number of boosting rounds;
• F (x) is the initial score function;
• F (x) is the updated score function after round t.
• r is the pseudo-residual or negative-gradient signal;
it
• h (x) is the regression tree fitted at round t.
Definition 1.8: Regression tree in boosting
A regression tree is a decision tree whose leaves contain numerical values rather than class
labels. In gradient boosting, these leaf values represent corrections that should be added
to the current score.
Example 1.4: A small correction tree
A regression tree added during boosting might output:
• −0.3 if oxygen saturation is high and symptom severity is mild;
• +0.4 if oxygen saturation is low and respiratory rate is high;
• +0.1 in another region.
This tree is not yet a final classifier. It is a rule for adjusting the current score upward or
downward in different regions of the feature space.
1.10.3 How to understand the gradient boosting update
Gradient boosting does not build one final classifier in a single step. Instead, it builds the model
gradually by adding small correction trees.
At boosting round t, the current model is
F (x).
t−1
This is a score function: for each observation x , it produces a current score F (x ). In binary
i t−1 i
classification, this score is often converted into a probability only at the end, for example through
the logistic function.
For the i-th observation, the loss is written as
(cid:0) (cid:1)
L y ,F (x ) ,
i t−1 i
where y is the true class label and F (x ) is the current prediction score.
i t−1 i
When we compute
(cid:12)
∂L(y
,s)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
∂s (cid:12)
s=Ft−1(xi)
we differentiate with respect to s and evaluate the derivative at the current model output F (x ),
t−1 i
while treating the true class label y as fixed. Thus the derivative answers the question:
If we change the current score a little, how will the loss change?
If the derivative is positive, increasing the score would increase the loss, so the score should
move downward; if the derivative is negative, increasing the score would decrease the loss, so the

score should move upward. Therefore, the negative gradient points in the direction in which the
current score should move in order to reduce the loss.
These derivatives are known only at the training points, and we need a function h (x) that
(cid:12)
generalizes these desired corrections over the feature space. This is why r = − ∂L(yi,s)(cid:12)
it ∂s (cid:12)
s=Ft−1(xi)
is used as the target in round t. To fit a regression tree h (x) to the targets r means to use
t it
the predictors x as inputs and the pseudo-residuals r as numerical response values. Since the
i it
pseudo-residuals represent the direction and size of the change needed in the current score, the
fitted tree learns a function that approximates these corrections in different regions of the feature
space i.e. it learns a correction rule. Thus, for different future values of the predictors x, the tree
can output an estimated correction of the current score.
After fitting this regression tree h (x), the model is updated by
F (x) = F (x) + ηh (x),
t t−1 t
where η > 0 is the learning rate. Thus, the new tree does not replace the existing model. Instead,
it adds a small correction to it.
So the overall logic of gradient boosting is:
1. start with a simple initial score;
2. measure how the current scores should change to reduce the loss;
3. fit a small regression tree to these desired corrections;
4. add that tree, scaled by the learning rate, to the current model;
5. repeat many times.
Only after all boosting rounds are completed is the final score F (x) converted into a probability
or a class decision.
1.10.4 Example with squared-error loss
We use squared-error loss in the following example because it makes the update steps especially
easy to see. This is not the most standard loss for classification boosting; in practice, binary
classification is usually handled with a classification-oriented loss such as logistic loss. However,
the basic correction logic is the same.
Example 1.5: Several boosting steps with squared-error loss
Consider this tiny dataset
Observation x y
1 1 0
2 2 0
3 3 0
4 4 1
5 5 1
Suppose squared-error loss is used:
(cid:0) (cid:1) 1(cid:0) (cid:1)2
L y,s = y − s ,
The partial derivative of this function with respect to s is s − y. At boosting round t, we

evaluate the negative gradient at y = y and s = F (x ), where y is the true class label
i t−1 i i
and F (x ) is the current prediction score.
t−1 i
Choose a learning rate η, for example η = 0.1 and the number of boosting rounds T.
Initialize. Under squared-error loss, the constant value that minimizes the total loss
(cid:88) 1
(y − c)2
i=1
is the sample mean of the y ’s.
Thus we initialize the model with constant score function equal to the mean of the class
labels:
0 + 0 + 0 + 1 + 1
F (x) = = 0.4.
So initially all five observations receive score 0.4.
Step 1: Compute pseudo-residuals. The negative gradient is
r = y − F (x ).
i1 i 0 i
Thus,
r = −0.4, r = −0.4, r = −0.4, r = 0.6, r = 0.6.
11 21 31 41 51
Step 2: Fit a regression tree to the pseudo-residuals. Among the candidate
thresholds 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5, the split at 3.5 is best, because it separates the pseudo-
residuals into two perfectly homogeneous groups. Thus the one-split regression tree
is
(cid:40)
−0.4, x < 3.5,
h (x) =
+0.6, x ≥ 3.5.
Step 3: Update the model. For the chosen learning rate η = 0.1 we have
F (x) = F (x) + 0.1h (x).
1 0 1
So the new scores are
0.36, 0.36, 0.36, 0.46, 0.46.
Convert scores to class labels if needed. Using threshold 0.5, the predicted classes
after the first boosting step are still
0, 0, 0, 0, 0.
So after one step, the scores have improved, but the class labels have not changed yet.
If we continue boosting, the same split remains optimal and the scores continue moving
toward the true labels. After the second boosting round, the scores become
0.324, 0.324, 0.324, 0.514, 0.514,
so the predicted classes become
0, 0, 0, 1, 1.

Thus, this example shows the real logic of gradient boosting: each round makes a small
correction to the score function, and only after enough corrections may the final class
labels change. In other words, scores may improve before the final class labels change.
If we continue boosting with η = 0.1, the same split remains optimal and the scores keep
moving toward the true labels. For example,
F (x) = (0.236196, 0.236196, 0.236196, 0.645706, 0.645706).
Thus, in this example, the class labels become correct after the second boosting round,
while additional rounds mainly increase the confidence of the predictions. A larger learning
rate would usually make this correction happen faster, but in general it can also lead to
different intermediate scores and possibly different class labels.
Remark 1.12: Choosing the number of boosting rounds
There is no universal fixed number of boosting iterations that is best for all problems. In
practice, one usually chooses the number of rounds by validation or cross-validation. The
model is trained for many rounds, but performance is monitored on separate validation
data, and one stops at the iteration where validation performance is best. This is called
early stopping.
The number of boosting rounds and the learning rate must be chosen together: a smaller
learning rate usually requires more iterations, while a larger learning rate often requires
fewer.
1.10.5 Why gradient boosting is powerful and how it can overfit
Gradient boosting is powerful because:
• trees capture nonlinearities and interactions;
• boosting reduces the remaining error step by step;
• small learning steps can create a flexible yet controllable model;
• regularization and validation can be used to control complexity.
Remark 1.13: Regularization and validation in gradient boosting
Here, regularization means controlling model flexibility through shallow trees, small learning
rates, subsampling, and limited boosting rounds, while validation means monitoring
performance on separate data to choose hyperparameters and stop training appropriately.
At the same time, boosting can overfit when:
• too many trees are added;
• individual trees are too deep;
• the learning rate is too large;
• the validation protocol is poor;
• hyperparameters are tuned on the test set.

Warning 1.4: Boosting is powerful, but not immune to noise
A boosted model can fit subtle signal very well, but the same flexibility can also fit noise.
Small learning rates, shallow trees, proper validation, and early stopping are therefore
central practical safeguards.
2 Modern Boosted Tree Systems
XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost are all modern implementations of boosted decision trees.
They should not be understood as three unrelated classifiers. Their importance is practical: they
keep the core boosting idea, but organize it differently in order to improve speed, robustness,
regularization, or handling of categorical variables.
2.1 Common backbone
Their common backbone is:
1. start from a simple model;
2. repeatedly compute where the current model is wrong according to a loss function;
3. fit a new tree that improves that;
4. add the tree to the ensemble;
5. use regularization and validation to control complexity.
All three methods:
• build additive ensembles of trees;
• rely on greedy split selection inside each tree;
• aim for strong predictive performance on tabular data;
• require careful hyperparameter tuning and careful evaluation.
2.2 Design differences
It is helpful to think of the three systems as emphasizing different design goals:
• XGBoost: strong regularization and a robust general-purpose design;
• LightGBM: speed and scalability;
• CatBoost: principled handling of categorical variables.
Thus, the methods are not mainly distinguished by what they try to do, but by how they organize
the boosting process and which practical problems they emphasize.
2.3 XGBoost
XGBoost is often treated as a strong general-purpose baseline for boosted trees. It emphasizes
careful regularization, efficient implementation, and reliable performance on many tabular
datasets.

Remark 2.1: How to think about XGBoost
The main conceptual picture of XGBoost is not “a completely different method,” but “a
highly optimized, strongly regularized gradient-boosted tree system.”
In practice, XGBoost is often associated with:
• strong predictive performance;
• good control of model complexity through regularization;
• wide practical use and mature software support.
It is also useful to remember that XGBoost is more than a fast implementation of basic gradient
boosting. It adds extra optimization and regularization ideas that often make training more
stable and effective in practice.
Typical cautions include:
• careful tuning is still needed;
• categorical variables often require explicit preprocessing;
• feature importance should not be interpreted causally.
2.4 LightGBM
LightGBM is designed with computational speed and large-scale learning in mind. Two ideas are
especially important for understanding it:
• histogram-based splitting: continuous feature values are grouped into bins, which makes
split search much faster;
• leaf-wise tree growth: instead of growing all leaves level by level, the algorithm extends
the leaf that currently looks most promising.
Remark 2.2: How to think about LightGBM
The key practical message is speed and scalability. LightGBM is especially attractive when
the dataset is large and fast experimentation matters.
These design choices can make LightGBM very efficient, especially on large tabular datasets. At
the same time, leaf-wise growth can produce more aggressive trees, so the method may need
careful control of depth, leaf size, and regularization.
Typical strengths include:
• fast training;
• strong performance on large tabular datasets;
• efficient handling of many features.
Typical cautions include:
• aggressive tree growth can overfit if not controlled;
• hyperparameters controlling tree size and regularization matter strongly;

• speed does not remove the need for proper evaluation.
2.5 CatBoost
CatBoost is particularly important when categorical variables play a central role. It is designed
to handle categorical information in a more principled way than naive one-hot encoding in many
settings.
A central idea in CatBoost is the use of ordered target statistics. Instead of replacing a category
by a naive target mean computed from the whole dataset, which may create target leakage,
CatBoost uses an ordered scheme that reduces this problem and gives a more careful estimate of
category information.
Remark 2.3: How to think about CatBoost
CatBoost is especially valuable when high-cardinality categorical variables are important,
categories are rare, and careless encoding could create leakage or unstable estimates.
CatBoost is also known for using oblivious (symmetric) trees, where all nodes at the same depth
use the same split condition.
Example 2.1: A simple categorical contrast
Suppose an admissions dataset contains a variable high_school_ID with many possible
categories. A naive one-hot encoding may create a large number of binary columns and
may behave poorly if some schools appear only a few times. CatBoost instead tries to
summarize category signal through ordered target statistics, which can be more compact
and often more robust in such situations.
Typical strengths include:
• strong handling of categorical predictors;
• reduced danger of naive target leakage in category encoding;
• good performance on tabular problems where categories are central.
Typical cautions include:
• it is not automatically best on every dataset;
• careful validation and tuning are still needed;
• interpretability issues remain similar to those of other boosted-tree systems.
Insight 2.1: Main takeaway of this section
XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost are all boosted-tree systems built on the same general
idea. Their practical differences come mainly from design priorities: XGBoost emphasizes
robust regularized boosting, LightGBM emphasizes speed and scalability, and CatBoost
emphasizes principled handling of categorical variables.
2.6 Practical Hyperparameters and Their Meaning
Although software packages differ, the most important conceptual hyperparameters are similar
across modern boosted-tree systems.

• Number of trees / boosting rounds. More trees increase expressive power, because the
model can make more correction steps. But too many trees may overfit, especially if the
learning rate is large or the individual trees are too complex.
• Learning rate. The learning rate controls how strongly each new tree changes the current
score function. Smaller learning rates usually require more boosting rounds, but they often
give a more gradual and stable fit.
• Tree depth or number of leaves. These parameters control the complexity of each
individual tree. Shallow trees produce simpler corrections, while deeper trees or larger
numbers of leaves can capture richer interactions but may overfit more easily.
• Subsampling. Using only a subset of rows or columns at each boosting round can regularize
the model and reduce variance.
• Regularization parameters. Modern implementations often include penalties or con-
straints that discourage overly complex trees or overly large leaf values.
Remark 2.4: Three high-impact hyperparameters
Among the most influential tuning parameters in boosted trees are:
• the number of trees,
• the learning rate,
• the complexity of each tree.
These parameters interact strongly and should usually be tuned together rather than one
by one in isolation.
Remark 2.5: A practical view of fine-tuning
Fine-tuning should usually begin with the three high-impact hyperparameters above.
A smaller learning rate often requires more trees. Larger or deeper trees often require
stronger regularization or fewer rounds. In practice, tuning is usually done with validation
or cross-validation, often together with early stopping, rather than by trying to optimize
one parameter at a time on the test set.
2.7 Practical Do’s and Don’ts for Modern Boosted Tree Systems
Do’s
• Begin with a simpler baseline before moving to a more elaborate boosted system.
• Use validation, cross-validation, and early stopping whenever possible.
• Tune the learning rate, number of trees, and tree complexity jointly.
• Check carefully how categorical variables are handled in the chosen implementation.
• Interpret feature importance as predictive importance, not as causal importance.
Don’ts
• Do not judge model quality from training error alone.
• Do not tune hyperparameters on the test set.

• Do not assume that a modern library automatically removes the need for careful preprocessing
and validation.
• Do not treat one package as universally best for every tabular dataset.
• Do not ignore leakage, mislabeled data, or unstable category encoding.
XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost are all members of the same boosted-tree family. Their main
differences are practical rather than conceptual in the deepest sense. XGBoost emphasizes robust
regularized boosting, LightGBM emphasizes speed and scalability, and CatBoost emphasizes
principled handling of categorical variables.
For practical use, you should remember that the most important tuning decisions usually concern
the number of trees, the learning rate, and the complexity of the individual trees. These choices
interact strongly and should be made with validation rather than by trial and error on the test
set.
2.8 Compact Comparison of Tree-Based Classification Methods
Method Parallel / Main idea Main effect Typical use / caution
sequential
Single tree Single Greedy par- Interpretable lo- Easy to explain, but unstable
model tition of the cal rules and often weaker predictively
feature space
Bagging Parallel Bootstrap Mainly variance Useful when trees are unsta-
many trees reduction ble; does not solve leakage or
and aggre- interpretability
gate them
Random For- Parallel Bagging + Stronger vari- Strong baseline for tabular
est random fea- ance reduction data; less transparent than
ture subsets through decorre- one tree
lation
AdaBoost Sequential Reweight Sequential em- Conceptually important; can
harder obser- phasis on mis- be sensitive to noisy labels
vations classified cases
Gradient Sequential Fit correc- Flexible additive Very powerful, but can overfit
boosting tion trees to improvement without validation and regu-
a loss-based larization
error signal
XGBoost / Sequential Modern High predictive Choice depends on scale,
LightGBM / boosted-tree performance regularization needs, and
CatBoost systems with with practical categorical-feature structure
different optimizations
design em-
phases
2.9 Summary
A single decision tree is attractive because it is easy to interpret, but it may be unstable and
sensitive to the particular training sample. Ensemble methods address this weakness in two main
ways.
Bagging and Random Forest mainly reduce variance by aggregating many trees. Random Forest
strengthens this idea by forcing more diversity through feature randomness. Boosting is different:
it builds trees sequentially so that each new tree improves the current ensemble. AdaBoost

emphasizes harder cases through reweighting, while gradient boosting fits correction trees to a
loss-based error signal.
Modern systems such as XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost are all boosted-tree systems built
on that same general idea, but with different practical design priorities. Their choice depends
less on abstract theory alone and more on issues such as regularization, computational scale, and
handling of categorical variables.
The main practical lesson of this lecture is that powerful ensemble methods are not automatic
solutions. Their performance depends on thoughtful tuning, honest validation, and a clear
understanding of what kind of prediction problem is actually being solved.